Informational Friend Recommendation in Social Media

Shengxian Wan†, Yanyan Lan†, Jiafeng Guo†, Chaosheng Fan‡, Xueqi Cheng†

yInstitute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China
wanshengxian@software.ict.ac.cn, {lanyanyan, guojiafeng}@ict.ac.cn

zSchool of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, P.R.China

fcs@pku.edu.cn, cxq@ict.ac.cn

ABSTRACT
It is well recognized that users rely on social media (e.g. Twit-
ter or Digg) to fulﬁll two common needs (i.e.
social need
and informational need ) that is to keep in touch with their
friends in the real world and to have access to information
they are interested in. Traditional friend recommendation
methods in social media mainly focus on a user’s social need,
but seldom address their informational need (i.e. suggesting
friends that can provide information one may be interested
in but have not been able to obtain so far). In this paper, we
propose to recommend friends according to the information-
al utility, which stands for the degree to which a friend sat-
isﬁes the target user’s unfulﬁlled informational need, called
informational friend recommendation. In order to capture
users’ informational need, we view a post in social medi-
a as an item and utilize collaborative ﬁltering techniques
to predict the rating for each post. The candidate friends
are then ranked according to their informational utility for
recommendation. In addition, we also show how to further
consider diversity in such recommendations. Experiments
on benchmark datasets demonstrate that our approach can
signiﬁcantly outperform the traditional friend recommenda-
tion methods under informational evaluation measures.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
ﬁltering

Keywords
Friend Recommendation, Informational Utility, Diversity

1.

INTRODUCTION

Recently, online social media (e.g. Twitter or Digg) has
become one of the main platforms for users to publish, share
and obtain information. For users of social media, social
need and informational need are two well recognized basic
needs. On one hand, users are active in social media since

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

they can contact their friends in the real world very con-
veniently; on the other hand, users can access information
from others more comprehensively and rapidly.

Friend recommendation is a key approach to help users
discover new friends and interesting information. However,
traditional friend recommendation methods in social media
mainly focus on users’ social need (i.e. suggesting potential
friends one may know), but seldom address their informa-
tional need (i.e. suggesting friends that can provide infor-
mation one may be interested in but have not been able to
obtain so far). For example, some link prediction methods
[8] use the network structure or users’ proﬁles as the ba-
sis for recommendations, thus mainly considering the social
need. Other methods such as [4] try to utilize user gener-
ated content and recommend friends by user-user similarity.
However, these methods may only suggest similar users, but
not friends that can better satisfy users’ unfulﬁlled infor-
mational need. For example, consider user A as the target
user, if the similarity between user B and A is 99%, and
between user C and A is 50%, it seems that the similarity
based methods will recommend B rather than C to A. How-
ever, the information from B is useless for A if most of them
have already been obtained by A from other friends.

In this paper, we propose to conduct friend recommenda-
tion according to the informational utility, which is deﬁned
as the degree to which a friend satisﬁes the target user’s
unfulﬁlled informational need. We call this approach infor-
mational friend recommendation. To capture a user’s in-
formational need, we view typical posts in social media as
items and utilize collaborative ﬁltering (CF) techniques to
predict the rating for each post. The candidate friends are
then ranked according to their informational utility for rec-
ommendation. Furthermore, we discuss how to introduce
diversity into the recommendation process to reduce infor-
mation redundancy. Our experiments on Digg datasets show
that our method can signiﬁcantly outperform the tradition-
al state-of-the-art recommendation methods with respect to
informational evaluation measures.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper to
explore the user’s unfulﬁlled informational need for friend
recommendation, which is a novel approach for studies in
social media.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we will review some related works on friend recommendation
in social media. Section 3 introduces the detailed formula-
tion of our approach. Section 4 presents our experimental
results and Section 5 concludes the paper.

10452. RELATED WORK

Friend recommendation in social networks can be viewed
as a link prediction problem [9] in complex networks. Liben-
Nowell et al. [8] ﬁrstly discussed link prediction in social net-
works and compared lots of methods based on node proximi-
ty. These methods mainly utilize the structural information
of a given social network.

Along with structural information, there are many oth-
er types of information such as the user’s proﬁle and the
user generated content of the social network. For exam-
ple, Hannon et al. [4] proposed diﬀerent methods to proﬁle
the users by user generated content and recommend friends
based on proﬁle similarity. Recently, more and more meth-
ods utilize structural information together with other types
of information for recommendation. For example, Kim et
al. [5] proposed a recommendation system for both friend
and tweet recommendation. They proposed a novel prob-
abilistic model based on PLSI and combined content and
structural information in the model.

Diﬀerent recommendation methods may be inclined to
satisfy diﬀerent user needs. Chen et al. [1] compared d-
iﬀerent friend recommendation algorithms in an enterprise
social network and found that the algorithms based on in-
formation about the social network can ﬁnd more known
users while the algorithms checking for content similarity
are more suited for discovering new friends. However, all
of the methods mentioned above do not explicitly explore
users’ unfulﬁlled informational need for recommendation.
3. OUR APPROACH

Diﬀering from traditional methods, we propose to recom-
mend friends that can better satisfy users’ unfulﬁlled infor-
mational need, which is called informational friend recom-
mendation. For this purpose, we need to ﬁrst mine users’
informational need. Here we consider users’ unfulﬁlled infor-
mational need as the posts one may be interested in but are
unable to obtained from his/her current friends so far, and
mine such information with CF methods. We then introduce
a quantity named informational utility, which stands for the
degree to which a friend satisﬁes the target user’s unfulﬁlled
informational need. Finally, we rank all the friend candi-
dates by high informational utility for recommendation.
3.1 Collaborative Filtering

As mentioned above, the ﬁrst step for informational friend
recommendation is to capture users’ unfulﬁlled information-
al need. Here we view a post in social media as an item and
consider the posts a user may be interested in but which are
unable to be obtained so far as his/her unfulﬁlled informa-
tional need. Therefore, we need to accurately predict the
rating of each unobtained post for the target user. Natural-
ly, the rating prediction problem can be handily solved by
CF techniques.

There are two popular approaches in CF: the neighbourhood-

based methods and model-based methods. The basic idea
of the neighbourhood-based methods is that similar users or
items on observed ratings will act similarly on unobserved
ratings. They identify neighbours of users or items, and con-
duct rating predictions based on their neighbours’ ratings.
The model-based methods try to uncover latent features that
explain the observed ratings. They project users and items
to the same latent factor space and the ratings are repre-
sented as the inner product of the latent factor vectors.

∩

In this paper, we use several traditional state-of-the-art
CF methods to conduct the rating prediction task: user-
based KNN, SVD, and SVD++ [6].

Recently, recommendation is more recognized as a ranking
problem; therefore ranking techniques are widely used for
recommendation.
In this paper, we also use the ranking
approach by introducing a pairwise ranking loss into SVD
and SVD++; the corresponding methods are called Rank-
SVD and Rank-SVD++ [2].

With the predicted rating for each post, we sort the posts
in descending order according to rating and select the top
N as the post list that the target user is interested in but
cannot obtain from their existing friends, denoted by list
Lneed (u). We use Ineed (u) to denote the set of posts in
Lneed (u). Note that in our work, we set N as 200.
3.2 Recommend with Informational Utility

We now introduce the quantity named informational util-
ity, which stands for the degree to which a friend satisﬁes
the target user’s unfulﬁlled informational need. Formally,
the informational utility of user u
given the target user u is
deﬁned as:

′

∑

IU u(u
′

) =

i∈Ineed (u)

Ipub (u′) weight(i)

jIpub(u′)j + C

;

(1)

′

) is the set of posts from user u

′
where Ipub(u
(by sharing,
publishing or other activities), weight(i) is the weight func-
tion of post i which decreases with the rank position in the
ranking list Lneed (u), and C is a smoothing factor. Note
that the numerator denotes the weighted information gain
′
the target user u can obtain from user u
, while the denom-
inator denotes the cost for user u when browsing the posts
′
from user u
. The smoothing factor C is used to eliminate
inactive users with few posts and to prevent over-ﬁtting.

Based on Eq. (1), the top-k friend recommendation task
can be accomplished by ranking the candidate users accord-
ing to their informational utility for the target user.
3.3 Diversity

Beyond recommendation with respect to each user’s in-
formational utility independently, diversity is another im-
portant factor which is usually considered in information
retrieval (IR) and recommender systems. In this context, di-
versity means that the users in a recommendation list should
cover as many diﬀerent aspects of informational need of the
target user as possible.
In IR, one popular strategy is to
consider documents as composed of information nuggets and
diversity is formalized as a max-COVER problem solved by
a greedy algorithm [3]. Here we borrow this idea to achieve
diversity in informational friend recommendation.

While it is non-trivial to identify nuggets in documents,
our approach can naturally use the posts as the nuggets. To
achieve diversity, we introduce a weight decay factor (cid:11) into
Eq. (1). Then in the greedy process, as long as a post is cov-
ered by the previously selected friend, the weight of the post
will be punished by (cid:11) to prevent information redundancy.
The modiﬁed informational utility for diversity is deﬁned as:

∑

IU u(u
′

) =

i∈Ineed (u)

Ipub (u′) weight(i)(cid:11)ct(i)

;

(2)

∩
jIpub(u′)j + C

where ct(i) is the time of post i being covered. Essentially,
if (cid:11) is equal to 1, it turns back to the original informational
utility.

10464. EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we conduct experiments on real social me-
dia datasets and compare diﬀerent CF methods and friend
recommendation methods.
4.1 Experimental Settings

In this work, we use data from Digg 1 collected by Lerman
et al. [7] in June 2009 through Digg API for experiments.
Digg is a social news aggregator where social need and in-
formational need are both important for the users. Besides,
users of Digg can access posts from both their friends and
other sources such as the front page. As a result, we can
construct the ground-truth of any given user’s information-
al need by the posts digged from the front page but not
from their friends. The data contains the information of so-
cial network and user digging behaviours. Overall, there are
3,553 stories, 3,018,197 votes, 139,409 users and 1,731,658
asymmetric links between these users.

We sort the story posts by the time they were published
and separate them into training, validation and testing set,
with sizes 2553, 500, 500, respectively. For the training set,
we separate it into two subsets for each user, one is the set
of posts from other friends and the other is the set of posts
from other sources, denoted as train1 and train2 respective-
ly. Train1 is used for the training of CF and train2 is used
as the test data to evaluate the performance of CF method-
s. After that, the ranking strategies are conducted over the
whole training set, and the validation set is used for tuning
the smoothing factor C. Finally, measurements on test data
are used to evaluate the performance of the recommendation
methods.
4.2 Experiments on Collaborative Filtering

Firstly, we compare the results of diﬀerent CF methods
on our dataset, including KNN, SVD, SVD++, rank-SVD
and rank-SVD++. In the experiments, we deﬁne the pos-
itive examples (i.e. a user diggs a post) as rating 1. We
can see that this is a one-class CF problem, so we sample
equal amount of negative samples deﬁned as rating 0 in each
round of iteration in the optimization process of these meth-
ods. For SVD++, we use all the positive examples as user
feedback since we have no implicit user feedback data. In
this section, we use precision@n as the evaluation measure,
since the output of the ﬁrst step is a ranking list.

From the experimental results in Fig.1, we can see that:
(1) All the model-based CF methods (SVD, SVD++, Rank-
SVD, Rank-SVD++) work better than neighbourhood-based
CF methods (KNN); (2) The methods based on ranking loss
(Rank-SVD, Rank-SVD++) are better than the correspond-
ing methods based on regression loss (SVD, SVD++). These
results are in accordance with previous studies.

In the following friend recommendation experiments, we
choose Rank-SVD as the CF method due to its good perfor-
mance and simpler implementation over Rank-SVD++.
4.3 Experiments on Friend Recommendation
Now we compare our method (denoted as Inf-Rec) with

some state-of-the-art friend recommendation methods.

For baselines, we use three commonly used methods which
only use the network structure, including: (1)friend-of-friend

Figure 1: Results of diﬀerent CF methods

including:

(FdFd): this method simply recommends the friends of friend-
s to the target user; (2)follower-of-friend (FlFd): this method
recommends users who have similar friend sets as the target
user; (3)friend-of-follower-of-friend (FdFlFd): this method
goes further than FlFd by recommending the friends of FlFd
to the target user.
In addition, we also propose two oth-
er baselines which focus on users’ informational need for
recommendation2,
(1)sharing similarity(Share-
Sim): this method ranks users by Jaccard similarity of dig-
ging behaviours with the target user; (2)sharing eﬃcien-
cy(Share-Eﬃ): this method ranks users by the ratio of com-
mon posts with the target user to the total posts they digged.
In this paper, we mainly focus on satisfying users’ infor-
mational need in friend recommendation. Therefore, we use
an informational evaluation measure for comparison, which
is deﬁned as the eﬃciency of the potential information gain
that one can obtain from the recommendation:
Ipub(ui)j

jIneed (u)

;

(3)

EIG@k =

k∑

i=1

1
k

∩
jIpub(ui)j

where k stands for the number of friends recommended.

Figure 2: Evaluation results of recommendation lists

From the experimental results in Fig.2, we can see that:
(1) Our method can signiﬁcantly outperform the baselines.
For example, the relative improvement of Inf-Rec over the

1http://digg.com/. Digg’s home page has changed several
times in recent years and now it is very diﬀerent from the
old version when the dataset was crawled.

2Since in the Digg datasets, there is no content information,
we could not implement the traditional methods on content
information.

0.10.110.120.130.140.150.160.170.180.19p@5p@10p@20p@50PopularityKNNSVDSVD++Rank-SVDRank-SVD++00.010.020.030.040.050.060.07EIG@1EIG@5EIG@10FdFdFdFlFdFlFdShare-EffiShare-SimInf-Rec1047worst baseline is 497%, and the relative improvement of Inf-
Rec over the best baseline is 56:4% on EIG@5; (2) The
methods based on network structure (FdFd, FlFd, FdFlFd)
perform the worst amongst all the methods. For example,
the average EIG@1 is 0.0124, which is much smaller than
that of the two designed baselines based on user digging be-
haviours (0.0369). Therefore, we can conclude that both
methods based on network structure and user digging be-
haviours cannot properly address the user’s unfulﬁlled in-
formational need. Our method fully explores a user’s infor-
mational need by the deﬁned informational utility, and thus
achieves better performance.

Figure 3: Results with diﬀerent smoothing factor

4.4 Discussions

In this section, we discuss the eﬀect of the smoothing fac-

tor C and diversity mentioned in Section 3.3.

(1) Fig.3 shows the varying curve of EIG with C on the
validation set. We can see that the algorithm will be severe-
ly over-ﬁtting without the smoothing factor, and the result
will stay stable when C becomes large enough. In our ex-
periments, we set C = 30.

(2) Fig.4 shows the SET COST =SET GAIN curve on
the test set to compare the diversity of recommendation
lists, where SET COST is the sum of users’ costs in the
recommendation list and SET GAIN is deﬁned as

(

k∪

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

)∩

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ;

SET GAIN @k =

Ipub(ui)

Ineed (u)

i=1

(4)

where k stands for the number of friends recommended. A
recommendation with higher gain and lower cost at set level
is better in the sense of diversity. We can see that by further
introducing the decay factor (cid:11) = 0:3 in our method, it can
achieve better performance in terms of diversity.

5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed to conduct friend recommenda-
tion according to users’ informational need, which is called
informational friend recommendation. Firstly, we utilized
collaborative ﬁltering techniques to capture users’ unfulﬁlled
informational need. Secondly, two ranking strategies were
conducted according to informational utility to obtain the
recommendation. Our experimental results on Digg datasets
show that our method signiﬁcantly outperforms the current
state-of-the-art friend recommendation methods.

Figure 4: Diversity result of recommendation lists, where
the points on the curve corresponding to diﬀerent ks.

As for future work, we plan to investigate how to conduc-
t informational friend recommendation with a uniﬁed ap-
proach other than the two-step method in this paper.

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research work was funded by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grants No. 61232010,
No. 61203298, No. 61003166, 863 Program of China un-
der Grants No. 2012AA011003, and National Key Tech-
nology R&D Program under Grants No. 2011BAH11B02,
No. 2012BAH39B02, No. 2012BAH39B04.

7. REFERENCES
[1] J. Chen, W. Geyer, C. Dugan, M. Muller, and I. Guy.

Make new friends, but keep the old: recommending
people on social networking sites. CHI ’09, pages
201–210, 2009.

[2] K. Chen, T. Chen, G. Zheng, O. Jin, E. Yao, and

Y. Yu. Collaborative personalized tweet
recommendation. SIGIR ’12, pages 661–670, 2012.
[3] C. Clarke, M. Kolla, G. Cormack, O. Vechtomova,

A. Ashkan, S. B¨uttcher, and I. MacKinnon. Novelty
and diversity in information retrieval evaluation. SIGIR
’08, pages 659–666, 2008.

[4] J. Hannon, M. Bennett, and B. Smyth. Recommending

twitter users to follow using content and collaborative
ﬁltering approaches. In ACM Recsys, pages 199–206,
2010.

[5] Y. Kim and K. Shim. TWITOBI: A Recommendation

System for Twitter Using Probabilistic Modeling.
ICDM ’11, pages 340–349, 2011.

[6] Y. Koren. Factorization meets the neighborhood: a
multifaceted collaborative ﬁltering model. KDD ’08,
pages 426–434, 2008.

[7] K. Lerman and R. Ghosh. Information Contagion: an

Empirical Study of Spread of News on Digg and
Twitter Social Networks. In ICWSM, 2010.

[8] D. Liben-Nowell and J. Kleinberg. The link prediction
problem for social networks. CIKM ’03, pages 556–559,
2003.

[9] L L¨u and T Zhou. Link prediction in complex networks:

A survey. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, (6):1150–1170, 2011.

00.010.020.030.040.050.060.07020406080100120EIG@1 C 00.511.522.533.544.5050100150200SET_GAIN SET_COST no diversityα=0.3 1048