Explicit Feedback in Local Search Tasks 

Dmitry Lagun1, Avneesh Sud2, Ryen W. White3, Peter Bailey2, Georg Buscher2 

1 Emory University, 2 Microsoft Bing, 3 Microsoft Research 

dlagun@mathcs.emory.edu, {avnsud, ryenw, pbailey, georgbu}@microsoft.com 

ABSTRACT 
Modern search engines make extensive use of people’s contextual 
information to finesse result rankings. Using a searcher’s location 
provides an especially strong signal for adjusting results for certain 
classes of queries where people may have clear preference for local 
results, without explicitly specifying the location in the query di-
rectly. However, if the location estimate is inaccurate or searchers 
want to obtain many results  from  a particular location, they have 
limited control on the location focus in the search results returned. 
In this paper we describe a user study that examines the effect of 
offering  searchers  more  control  over  how  local  preferences  are 
gathered and used. We studied providing users with functionality 
to offer explicit relevance feedback (ERF) adjacent to results auto-
matically identified as location-dependent (i.e., more from this lo-
cation). They can use this functionality to indicate whether they are 
interested in a particular search result and desire more results from 
that result’s location. We compared the ERF system against a base-
line (NoERF) that used the same underlying mechanisms to retrieve 
and rank results, but did not offer ERF support. User performance 
was assessed across 12 experimental participants over 12 location-
sensitive topics, in a fully counter-balanced design. We found that 
participants interacted with ERF frequently, and there were signs 
that ERF has the potential to improve success rates and lead to more 
efficient searching for location-sensitive search tasks than NoERF. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search 
and Retrieval – relevance feedback, search process. 

Keywords 
Explicit relevance feedback, Location-sensitive search. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Location is an important facet of the relevance experience for a sig-
nificant fraction of the search queries that modern Web search en-
gines receive [1][9]. Search providers have constructed entity-spe-
cific  local  search  experiences,  analogous  to the  data  contained  in 
Yellow Pages directories (yp.com). Users may engage specifically 
with these results, whether within the main result listing or in a sep-
arate  search  vertical  experience.  One  class  of  location-sensitive 
query is local queries, where users seek information pertaining to 
their current location. Search engines can support this via location 
awareness, allowing them to estimate the user’s current location us-
ing reverse IP lookups, GPS sensors, or explicit user settings, and 
tailor the results accordingly. However, these estimates may be in-
accurate  (depending  on  factors  such  as Web  proxies  and  internet 
providers), and search engines typically only add a few local results 
to the top 10 to mitigate the risks associated with personalization. 
If the searcher wants more results from a particular location of in-
terest, they have had limited ability to signal to a search engine their 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for per-
sonal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to  lists, requires  prior specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request 
permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland. 
Copyright © 2013 ACM  978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07…$15.00. 
 

interest in location-specific results beyond adding location terms to 
their queries (e.g., [wedding venues, tucson az]). Query refinement 
can be a cumbersome process (especially in a mobile setting where 
typing is difficult [3], but physical location may be particularly per-
tinent), and does not provide adequate control over search engine 
operation. In this paper we report on an investigation of an alterna-
tive method. We make the following contributions with this work: 

  We define a mechanism for allowing users to provide explicit 
relevance feedback (ERF) reflecting an individual searcher’s 
location preferences. Unlike previous work which has focused 
on applying relevance feedback at the term level [5][6], we fo-
cus on feedback at the geographic location level, where users 
explicitly request more results from a particular location. 

  We describe a user study to compare a search engine with lo-

cation awareness and ERF support, allowing searchers to 
quickly indicate their location preferences, against a compara-
tor system with location awareness but no ERF support. 

  We show that location-sensitive ERF has the potential to im-
prove success rates, leading to more efficient searching, and 
that it was perceived positively by participants. This indicates 
that, although ERF is generally dismissed as being cumber-
some [1], there are scenarios such as local search where it can 
be useful and users respond well to its inclusion. 

In the remainder of the paper we describe relevant related work, the 
study that we performed and its findings, and discuss implications.  

2.  RELATED WORK 
We  focus on related work discussing the impact of offering rele-
vance feedback (RF) (explicit or implicit) on searcher performance 
as well as describing location-aware search systems. 

Relevance feedback is the primary post-query method for automat-
ically improving system representations of a searcher’s information 
need  and  has  been  studied  extensively  [6][8].  Explicit  relevance 
feedback allows users to select documents or terms to be used for 
query expansion. Koenemann and Belkin [5] developed and studied 
search interfaces that varied the transparency with which users were 
permitted to see the terms selected for RF. A “penetrable” system 
variant allowed users to select the terms used for query expansion.  

Despite its potential, ERF is rarely used because it requires direct 
interaction, placing additional cognitive load on users [4]. Explana-
tions can be offered to help people understand the benefit of provid-
ing  feedback  [7].  Implicit  relevance  feedback  (IRF)  does  not  re-
quire user intervention in the feedback process – the search system 
automatically infers searcher preferences from user behavior such 
as clicks on results or query refinements. White et al. [10] investi-
gated user and task effects for explicit and implicit relevance feed-
back mechanisms and found that IRF is generally preferred by par-
ticipants  with  less  search  experience,  while  more  experienced 
searchers preferred ERF. These studies have focused on the provi-
sion of feedback about the topical relevance of document content. 
However, as our understanding of the role of context improves, and 
as search engines exhibit more context awareness and greater abil-
ity to interpret and use context, it is useful to capture ERF on dif-
ferent levels and for different signals. In this paper, we target the 
collection and application of ERF related to location preferences. 

1065Searcher location can be captured implicitly, from Internet provider 
or GPS information, or explicitly, from search queries containing 
location-related search terms. A significant volume of search que-
ries  have  location  intent,  and  such  information  can  be  used  for  a 
range of applications, from appropriately adapting spelling correc-
tions to promoting search results associated  with entities or busi-
nesses  located  near  the  user.  Wang  et  al.  [9]  introduced  an  algo-
rithm for detecting a query’s most dominant location, which can be 
used to re-rank search results by placing results from the detected 
dominant  location  higher.  Bennett  et  al.  [1] proposed  a  machine- 
learned method for modeling and inferring query location to subse-
quently personalize search results for the user. For example, the in-
tent behind the query [msg] issued in New York City may well be 
Madison  Square  Garden  rather  than  monosodium  glutamate,  the 
dominant search intent for this query globally. Despite several ad-
ditional  experiments  evaluating  the  utility  of  using  query  or  user 
location information to improve search performance, there has been 
no work on helping searchers better refine their searches to target 
particular locations. We address that challenge in this research. 

To summarize, our paper examines the use of ERF at the location 
level in the context of local search tasks. As we discover, ERF can 
improve search performance along several dimensions. 

3.  EXPERIMENT DETAILS 
In this section we describe the experiment that we performed to un-
derstand the effect of ERF in location-sensitive tasks. The descrip-
tion includes the research questions that we answer, the study de-
sign, data capture, tasks, and two systems (ERF and NoERF).  

3.1  Research Questions 
The goal of the study was to address the following questions: 

RQ1: If ERF is available, do people engage with it? 
RQ2: Does search performance improve with the use of ERF? 
RQ3: How do people perceive ERF? 
RQ4: How do searcher and task factors affect ERF performance? 

The first question addresses the availability of ERF on result pages 
(since it was only available for some local results). The other ques-
tions cover ERF performance and participants’ perceptions of it.  

3.2  Study Design 
To answer the research questions we conducted a  controlled user 
study in which participants  were asked to attempt 12 pre-defined 
exploratory search tasks in a laboratory setting. The tasks are de-
scribed in the next section. The independent variable in our study 
was the presence or absence of ERF functionality. Before starting 
to use the ERF-enabled version of the search system, each partici-
pant was presented with a short interactive tutorial introducing the 
ERF functionality, explaining how to use it, and describing its ef-
fect on the engine. Presence or absence of ERF functionality was 
counterbalanced  among  participants  as  either  the  first  or  second 
block of 6 of 12 tasks each participant carried out, and vice versa.  

The  study  design  was  balanced  across  participants.  To  minimize 
task-related effects, tasks shown in the first and second block were 
fully balanced across all participants, i.e., each task appeared in the 
first block for half of the participants and the second block for the 
remaining half. Also, we controlled the position of a task within a 
block so that each task appeared in all positions 1 to 6 equally often. 

3.3  Surveys and Data Capture 
We employed questionnaires at several points during the course of 
the  study.  At  the  beginning  of  an  experiment,  before  starting  the 
first task, we asked participants about search, Internet usage famil-

iarity, as well as their usual strategies for dealing with a dissatisfac-
tory search results page when doing Web search. After the comple-
tion  of  each  task,  we  asked  the  participants  to  complete  a  short 
questionnaire that inquired about their performance in  attempting 
the task as well as the  helpfulness of the search engine on multi-
point  scales.  After  finishing  all  tasks,  participants  were  asked  to 
provide their overall impression of the systems in an exit survey. 

For  each  task,  we  recorded  the  following  user  interaction data:  a 
time-stamped list of URLs visited with the browser, the full HTML 
contents including screenshots of the visited pages, clicks on any 
hyperlinks,  and  mouse  cursor  positions  which  let  us  reconstruct 
hover events over specific areas of interest.  

3.4  Task Description and Examples 
We selected 12 tasks with specific local intent, derived from query 
logs of the Microsoft Bing search engine. All tasks are about dis-
covering specific types of places or services in a given city/region, 
e.g., airport shuttles, vineyards, courses etc. Of the 12 tasks, 9 were 
chosen with city-level intent, and 3 with state-level intent. To avoid 
local memory effects, we selected different locations for each task, 
all separate from the location where the user study was performed. 
The task description specified the location in which the participants 
should imagine themselves being; examples are shown in Fig. 1.  

To ensure all subjects had the same entry point, the first query and 
first search results page were fixed for each task. The task location 
was not specified in the first query, but provided as part of the task 
description; in addition, the search engine settings were set to sim-
ulate as if the query were issued from the specified location (e.g., 
as though a reverse IP lookup was performed or location set explic-
itly).  The  first  results  page  always  contained  at  least  one  correct 
result from the local area, but never contained enough correct re-
sults  to  complete  the  task  so  that  participants  had  to  continue 
searching to successfully finish. In the ERF version of the search 
engine, results from the local area were decorated with an icon that 
could be used to provide relevance feedback (upper left of Fig. 2). 

City-level Task: “You are temporarily living in Boston,  
Massachusetts (MA) and would like to learn or improve French 
as a foreign language. Find at least 4 Web sites that offer French 
courses in Boston (no online courses).”  
Initial Query = [French courses]. User Location=Boston, MA.  

State-Level Task: “You are on a road trip in Virginia State 
(VA) with some wine loving friends. Find 4 vineyards in  
Virginia and note down 2 wines from each vineyard.”  
Initial Query = [vineyard], User Location=VA. 

Figure 1. Example city- and state-level tasks used in the study. 

Figure 2. Provision and use of feedback in ERF system. The  
feedback icon and explanatory callout are shown in upper left. 

  

 

{driving school + Seattle, WA}{driving school + Bellevue, WA}{driving school + Redmond, WA}{driving school + Kirkland, WA}{driving school + Issaquah, WA}Query:driving schoolUser location: Redmond, WAResult location: Redmond, WAWeighted blending2ERF InterfaceSearch EngineLocation Neighbor Lookup1066As  searchers  attempted  tasks  they  saved  documents  that  they  be-
lieved  would  answer  the  question.  To  calculate  success  rates  on 
study completion, participants’ answers were assigned correctness 
labels by experimenters, with discussion to resolve disagreements. 

3.5  Systems 
The ERF system consists of a simplified search interface to the Mi-
crosoft  Bing  search  engine.  The  system  offered  modifications  to 
highlight, capture, and add local results using ERF, allowing users 
to request more results from a specific location. The search results 
page  presented  on  the  top  10  retrieved  results,  with  vertical  an-
swers, advertisements, and other page elements removed. Pagina-
tion was permitted to explore the results more deeply. If a caption 
contained a term specifying the location of the place/service cov-
ered in a result, such terms were highlighted (using bold-face font) 
in the same way as query terms, even if they were not in the query 
directly.  NoERF  used  the  same  backend  retrieval  elements,  but 
lacked the ERF functionality, i.e., ERF icons were not shown. 

An overview of the ERF system is provided in Fig. 2. If the user 
requested  “more  results  from  this  location”  by  clicking  on  a  link 
next to a result of interest then the ERF system would fetch more 
local results by issuing one or more additional queries containing 
location strings, and these results would be injected into the results 
listing using weighted blending (CombSUM [2]). Locations were 
connected to each result by automatically examining its caption (ti-
tle  and  snippet)  for  town  and  city  names  (e.g.,  in  Fig.  2  we  have 
“KLH  Driving  School  –  Redmond,  WA  –  Welcome”).  Any  local 
results—inferred either from location terms in the result caption, or 
because they were injected from one of the additional location-spe-
cific queries—were decorated with an ERF icon. Often a local area 
can encompass multiple cities. To address this we pre-computed a 
location  neighbor  map,  and  issued  multiple  queries  to  the  search 
engine with the neighboring locations. The weights for each addi-
tional query were adjusted based on proximity to the location of the 
selected result, and the number of ERF clicks for a given location. 

3.6  Participants 
Twelve participants were recruited from a user study pool external 
to Microsoft. Participants had a wide variety of  backgrounds and 
professions. Most used computers, the Web, and Web search sev-
eral times a day. Participants were generally pleased with the way 
that their current preferred search engine worked (M=2.18 on 1-5 
scale, 1=best). They reported rarely paginating through results or 
selecting related searches, but reported frequently refining queries. 

4.  RESULTS 
In this section we analyze the findings of the study. We examine a 
number of aspects of how ERF was used, how its performance com-
pared to the non-ERF system (NoERF), and participants’ percep-
tions of ERF. We also include some additional analysis of factors 
affecting the performance of the ERF system, specifically individ-
ual and task differences.  Paired t-tests and Wilcoxon signed-rank 
tests are used where appropriate, with the significance level (α) set 
to 0.05. We begin by examining the availability and participant en-
gagement with ERF during the tasks studied. 

4.1  Availability and Engagement with ERF 
We first wanted to understand the frequency with which ERF was 
made available to participants and quantify the extent of their en-
gagement with it. At least one explicit feedback icon was available 
on  30%  of  the  SERPs  viewed  on  the  ERF  system.  As  described 
earlier,  the  option  to  provide  ERF  was  only  shown  for  particular 
results,  limiting  its  coverage.  There  were  on  average  1.46  clicks 
(SD=1.36) on a feedback icon per task and 78% of the tasks on the 

ERF system had at least one feedback click. Overall, the findings 
show  that  ERF  was  available  to  participants  fairly  often  and  that 
they engaged with it frequently. 

4.2  ERF Task Performance 
We now analyze the performance of the ERF system compared to 
NoERF. We focus our analysis on two aspects: (i) task outcomes 
(levels of success in completing tasks correctly), and (ii) task effi-
ciency  (time  taken  and  actions  performed  during  searching).  We 
begin our analysis by focusing on task outcomes. 

4.2.1  Task Outcomes 
Task success rate on each of the two systems was calculated on a 
per-task basis and reflected the fraction of the required number of 
correct answers for each task that participants found. Answer cor-
rectness was determined by human judgments, as described earlier. 
To provide estimated answer volume on each system, we also com-
puted  the  average  number  of  answers  found  (including  those  ex-
ceeding  the  number  required  for the  task),  and the  fraction of  all 
found answers that were correct. Table 1 summarizes the findings.  

Table 1. Measures of task outcomes (averaged per task). 

Measure 

Task success rate 
Num. answers found 
Answer success rate 

Significance 

ERF  NoERF 
88.33%  83.66%   t(71)=1.57, p=0.12 
 t(71)=1.74, p=0.09 
87.81%  84.83%   t(71)=1.23, p=0.22 

4.41 

4.18 

The  table  shows  ERF performs  slightly  better  than  NoERF:  ERF 
has a higher task success rate, ERF helped participants find more 
answers, and a greater fraction of the answers found on ERF were 
correct. Although the differences are not significant at 𝛼=0.05 the 
findings are consistent and the p-values are fairly small.  

4.2.2  Task Efficiency 
In addition to studying task outcomes, we also examined the pro-
cess by which people attempted the tasks. We computed a number 
of temporal and action-based features to better understand the effi-
ciency  with  which  users  found  information  on  ERF  and  NoERF. 
Table 2 presents the results. Statistical significance at 𝛼=0.05 is de-
noted by star (*). Task termination was determined by participants.  

Table 2. Measures of task efficiency (averaged per task).  

Measure 

ERF  NoERF 
45.8s 
37.3s 
Time to first answer 
157.3s 
Time to task finish 
146.9s 
141.6s 
Time to required ans.  120.2s 
2.64 
2.03 
Num. unique queries 
Query length (words) 
2.60 
3.11 
1.21 
0.32 
Num. paginations 

Significance 

t(71)=1.75, p=0.08 
t(71)=1.16, p=0.25 
t(71)=3.01, p=0.001* 
t(71)=3.13, p=0.003* 
t(71)=2.68, p=0.009* 
t(71)=3.57, p<0.001* 

The findings summarized in Table 2 show that there are fewer que-
ries, shorter queries, and less pagination through the search results 
on ERF. Although there may be additional clicks associated with 
the use of ERF, the reduction of query length and quantity is im-
portant as entering queries directly is challenging in mobile settings 
[3], an important emerging area where local ERF could be helpful.  

The findings suggest that in many key aspects of the search process, 
ERF helped searchers be more efficient. However, if we consider 
the  time  to  first  answer  and  the  total  task  time,  the  times  are  not 
significantly  lower  for  ERF  than  NoERF  (p-values=0.08-0.25). 
One explanation for this, other than the small sample size, is that in 
ERF participants found more answers than were actually required 
for  the  task  (on  average  16%  extra  for  ERF  versus  6%  extra  for 
NoERF).  While  this  improved  coverage—and  the  answers  found 
were still more accurate (see last row of Table 1)—processing the 

1067additional answers in ERF also took participants longer. If we focus 
only on time to at most the number of answers required for the task, 
we can see from the third row of Table 2 that ERF is much faster. 

4.3  Perceptions of ERF 
We were also interested in participants’ perceptions of ERF. After 
each task, a survey asked the following about the system used: 

Q1:  How  good  was  the  search  engine  for  this  task?  (Scale:  very 
good, good, neither, bad, very bad) (SearchEngineGood). 

Q2: I think there was better information available (that the system 
did not help me find) (agree to disagree) (BetterInfoAvailable). 

Q3: I believe that I have succeeded in my performance of this task 
(agree to disagree) (PerceivedSuccess). 

All ratings had a five-point answer scale. Q2 and Q3 were presented 
as Likert scales, with options spanning agree to disagree. Table 3 
shows the average answer ratings for each question. 

Table 3. Participant perceptions of the system used.  

Ratings range from 1 to 5. Higher is more positive (Q1) and 
more agreement with the attitude statement (Q2 and Q3).  
Measure 
SearchEngineGood 
BetterInfoAvailable 
PerceivedSuccess 

ERF  NoERF 
4.04 
3.03 
4.38 

3.67 
3.21 
4.39 

Significance 

 Z = –2.33, p=0.009* 
 Z = –0.84, p=0.201 
 Z = –0.10, p=0.464 

Table 3 shows that when ERF is available in the search engine, par-
ticipants perceived that search engine more positively. There were 
also some indications that they believed that the engine had helped 
them  find  more  complete  information  (BetterInfoAvailable),  alt-
hough  not  significantly.  Interestingly,  although  participants  ap-
peared  slightly  more  successful  on  ERF  (Table  1),  they  reported 
task success as highly similar on each system (4.38 vs. 4.39). 

In the exit survey we asked participants about whether they would 
like ERF to be included in their favorite search engine.  Nine of the 
12  respondents  (75%)  reported  positively.  Those  who  liked  ERF 
cited its utility (e.g., “makes search easier”, “very useful”) and that 
it removed the need to specify the location (e.g., “saves time when 
dealing with location specific queries”). Those who disliked it felt 
that it should not be needed (“the engine should know my location 
and provide results according to my location if my search is loca-
tion  specific”).  No  participants  mentioned  any  additional  burden 
from  providing  explicit  feedback.  Overall,  participants  perceived 
ERF favorably and desired it in search systems. 

4.4  Factors Affecting ERF Performance 
Finally, we wanted to understand the extent to which individual and 
task factors impacted ERF performance. We computed the task suc-
cess  rate  (introduced  in  Section  4.1)  for  each  participant  and  for 
each task. We then identified participants and tasks where each of 
the  systems  performed  best  and  dropped  cases  where  the  perfor-
mance of ERF and NoERF was equal. For each participant group, 
we computed the average search frequency based on their responses 
to the entry questionnaire (on a scale of one to four, four being most 
frequent), and for each task group, we computed the average num-
ber of required answers (ranging from one to five). We chose these 
variables since they reflected important aspects of the search pro-
cess that could affect search outcomes, but were also independent 
of both system and task effects. 

Table 4 shows that less expert users derive more value from ERF 
(yet not significantly; p=0.07), and that ERF performs significantly 
better  for  tasks  where  more  answers  are  required.  Less  frequent 
searchers may be less expert and benefit from additional support. 

We also showed that ERF was helpful for tasks with more required 
answers, likely because it helped participants locate similar results. 

Table 4. Effect of search frequency and number of  

required answerers on task success on ERF and NoERF. 

Measure 

Search frequency 
Num. answers needed 

ERF 
best 
3.50 
4.67 

NoERF 

best 
4.00 
3.00 

Significance 

 Z = –1.51, p=0.065 
 t(9)=3.06, p=0.014* 

5.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Location is important in a substantial fraction of search queries and 
an increasing volume of search traffic originate from smartphones 
and other mobile devices. Therefore providing more efficient meth-
ods for users to both type less and get more relevant local results 
will continue to grow in importance in the coming years. The user 
study we performed was limited in terms of the number of partici-
pants  and  carefully  contrived  to  focus  on  location-sensitive  tasks 
that  required  multiple  answers.  Participants  were  also  asked  to 
search  in  multiple  unfamiliar  locations.  Such  tasks  do  occur,  for 
example with vacation planning, but may not be fully reflective of 
common usage patterns. Note that even though ERF was available 
for only 30% of SERPs on the ERF system, our findings show that 
participants interacted with ERF frequently, and that ERF has the 
potential  to  improve  success  rates  and  result  in  more  efficient 
searching. Participants perceived the engine more favorably when 
ERF was included, and most participants wanted to see it added to 
search  engines.  There  were  also  weak  indications  that  ERF  per-
formed  better  for  less  frequent  searchers  and  a  significant  signal 
that it performed best for tasks with more required answers. 

Our  findings  are  promising,  but  more  work  is  needed  to  validate 
them and improve the ERF technology. Future directions include 
experiments with larger numbers of participants; improving the rel-
evance quality of results when ERF is provided by the searcher; and 
improving the discoverability and explanation of ERF.  

REFERENCES 
[1]  Bennett, P., Radlinski, F., White, R., and Yilmaz, E. (2011). 

Inferring and using location metadata to personalize web 
search. SIGIR, 134−144. 

[2]  Fox, E. and Shaw, J. (1994). Combination of multiple 

searches. NIST Special Publication SP, 243−243. 

[3]  Henze, N., Rukzio, E. and Boll, S. (2012). Observational and 

experimental investigation of typing behavior using virtual 
keyboards on mobile devices. SIGCHI, 2659−2668. 

[4]  Jansen, B., Spink, A., and Saracevic, T. (2000). Real life, real 
users, and real needs: A study and analysis of user queries on 
the web. IP&M, 36(2): 207−227. 

[5]  Koenemann, J. and Belkin, N.J. (1996). A case for interac-
tion: A study of interactive information retrieval behavior 
and effectiveness. SIGCHI, 205−212. 

[6]  Rocchio, J.J. (1971). Relevance feedback in information re-
trieval. The SMART Retrieval System: Experiments in Auto-
matic Document Processing, 313−323. 

[7]  Ruthven, I. (2002). On the use of explanations as mediating 

device for relevance feedback. ECDL, 338−345. 

[8]  Salton, G. and Buckley, C. (1997). Improving retrieval per-

formance by relevance feedback. Readings in IR, vol. 24. 

[9]  Wang, L., Wang, C., Xie, X., Forman, J., Lu, Y., Ma, W.-Y., 
and Li, Y. (2005). Detecting dominant locations from search 
queries. SIGIR, 424−431. 

[10] White, R., Ruthven, I., and Jose, J.M. (2005). A study of fac-

tors affecting the utility of implicit relevance feedback. 
SIGIR, 35−42. 

1068