ThemeStreams: Visualizing the Stream

of Themes Discussed in Politics

ISLA, University of Amsterdam

ISLA, University of Amsterdam

ISLA, University of Amsterdam

Maarten de Rijke

The Netherlands
derijke@uva.nl

Ork de Rooij

The Netherlands
orooij@uva.nl

Daan Odijk

The Netherlands
d.odijk@uva.nl

ABSTRACT
The political landscape is ﬂuid. Discussions are always ongoing
and new “hot topics” continue to appear in the headlines. But what
made people start talking about that topic? And who started it?
Because of the speed at which discussions sometimes take place
this can be difﬁcult to track down. We describe ThemeStreams:
a demonstrator that maps political discussions to themes and in-
ﬂuencers and illustrate how this mapping is used in an interactive
visualization that shows us which themes are being discussed, and
that helps us answer the question “Who put this issue on the map?"
in streams of political data.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Systems and Soft-
ware—User proﬁles and alert services
Keywords
Political tweets, visualization, real-time streams

1.

INTRODUCTION

Over the past couple of years, politics and politicians have dis-
covered social media as important means for communicating with
voters and for inﬂuencing public opinion. Keeping track of the
many discussion forums and other outlets is no trivial matter. What
themes are being discussed? Who introduced a theme? Who “owns”
it? Typical politically relevant themes include: the economy, health-
care, defense, foreign policy. According to a leading communica-
tion agency, during recent national elections in The Netherlands
discussions revolved around approx. 500 issues, with differing lev-
els and patterns of attention.

The participants of political discussions can often be mapped to
a select number of so-called inﬂuencer groups. Speciﬁcally, one
can identify the following four groups. First, there are those who
currently actively have an (important) position within the govern-
ing body, the politicians. Second, there are those who lobby for
(speciﬁc) important issues, the lobbyists. Third, there are journal-
ists who specialize in politics as well as other high proﬁle media
inﬂuencers such as television stars or columnists. Fourth and ﬁ-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

nally, all other people taking part in political discussions we group
together as the rest: the public.

In this demonstrator we describe ThemeStreams: an interactive
visualization aimed at giving insight into the ownership and dy-
namics of themes being discussed, thereby enabling users to an-
swer questions such as Who put this issue on the map? Theme-
Streams allows users to explore streams of tweets, either from a
ﬁxed set of predeﬁned themes or through a search box.
It uses
stream graphs [1] to indicated how inﬂuencer groups discuss a theme,
thereby depicting the “aliveness” and ownership of a topic. Our vi-
sualization indicates when somebody said something, which inﬂu-
encer group this person belongs to, and it takes into account how
many people react to a statement to estimate the “size” and “life-
time” of a statement. ThemeStreams can be accessed at http:
//themestreams.xtas.net/.

2. DATA AND BACKEND

For this demonstrator of ThemeStreams we focus on the Dutch
political landscape. In the last couple of years Twitter has gained
enormous popularity within Dutch politics, and is seen as an impor-
tant outlet for talking about politics. Many politicians are actively
using twitter and journalists regularly quote tweets in live televi-
sion broadcasts. For this ThemeStreams demonstrator we therefore
actively follow the following inﬂuencer groups:

local ranks of politicians in municipalities and provinces);

• politicians (ministers, members of parliament, but also the
• journalists (news paper journalists as well as TV presenters);
• lobbyists (people pushing the people who are active in poli-
• other inﬂuencers (these include (satirical) columnists, politi-

tics);

cally engaged celebrities or stand-up comedians).

Tweets for the four inﬂuencer groups are being collected since late
2011. At the time of writing, the index driving ThemeStreams con-
tains over 3.9M tweets. The four inﬂuencer groups together make
up what we call the inner circle; it consists of about 1,400 individ-
ual users at the time of writing. In addition to the inner circle, we
also consider and crawl a group of followers of members of the in-
ner circle, approximately 245,000 users who together make up the
outer circle. As we explain below, messages in the outer circle are
used to weigh the impact of messages in the inner circle.

For content extraction and cleaning, we use the xTAS text anal-
ysis service.1 For indexing, storage and retrieval we use Elastic-
Search.2 We use a hand-tuned stop word list that also ﬁlters most
1http://xtas.net/
2http://www.elasticsearch.org/

1077Figure 1: ThemeStreams backend.

common http link patterns so we only end up with words. Hashtags
are stripped and indexed, and every mention is automatically se-
lected as a candidate for inclusion in the outer circle. An overview
of the ThemeStreams backend is given in Fig. 1.

3.

INTERACTION AND VISUALIZATION
Users can gain insights in the development of messages around
a topic in one of two ways. From the ThemeStreams home page
they can access a ﬁxed list of predeﬁned themes and then explore
streams of tweets around a theme they select. Alternatively, they
can enter a topic in a search box (item A in Fig. 2).

In response to a topic submitted by a user (either predeﬁned or
ad-hoc), ThemeStreams displays a zoomable stream graph at the
top of the page (item B in Fig. 2), depicting the number of tweets
in the inner circle of four inﬂuencer groups retrieved for the topic.
The thickness of the stream at each point in time is weighed by their
“lifetime” (as determined by the number of retweets and mentions
these tweets have received). In this way, we provide insight into
how inﬂuential a group has been throughout the development of a
theme, who ﬁnds a particular theme important and who were the
ﬁrst to talk about a particular theme.

Users can dive into more detail by zooming in using the focus +
context principle [2]. In part C in Fig. 2, users can select a speciﬁc
temporal interval, for instance because they know about important
events related to their topic or because they observe interesting phe-
nomena in the zoomable stream graph in part B of the interface.
This allows users to not only see how important a theme was for
an inﬂuencer group, but also what words one group used that other
groups did not. To provide context, the stream graph for the entire
period is also visualized (in part C of the interface); this enables
rapid re-inspection of time periods close to the current focus.

The user’s selection (indicated with a grey area, see part C), trig-
gers the following events in the interface: (1) the zoomable stream
graph in part B is restricted to the selected period and (2) in part
D a term cloud is generated based on the tweets in the selected
period. We offer two types of term cloud visualization selectable
through the buttons in part E: one with a separate cloud for each of
the inﬂuencer groups (see Fig. 3, right-hand side) and one with a
combined representation with different colors indicated which in-
ﬂuencer group was most inﬂuential for the term shown (see Fig. 3,
left-hand side).3

3In order to comply with the Twitter ToS, the publicly accessible
version of the demonstrator does not give access to tweets from
which term clouds are generated.

Figure 2: ThemeStreams front-end; the circled letters are ex-
plained in the text.

Initial usability studies have been carried out with colleagues and
with professional end users, media analysts working for a commu-
nication agent. The main ﬁndings show that ThemeStreams was
intuitive to understand, and inspection of parts of any query was
easy to do. The combined cloud proved to be more insightful for
fast overviews of the data. The individual clouds proved to be more
useful for inspecting relative word usage between the groups. We
also found a need for also depicting most represented speakers for
any one group. A more detailed user study is currently in the works,
and will be presented at a later time.

Figure 3: Users can switch between a combined cloud repre-
sentation where color indicates originating inﬂuencer group, or
separate representations per group, using option E in Fig. 2.

4. CONCLUSION

We have presented ThemeStreams, an interactive visualization
for inspecting the political discourse over time using the Twitter
posts of four political inﬂuencer groups. Other suitable application
scenarios for ThemeStreams include discourse analysis over time
in other domains, such as news paper archives.
Acknowledgements. This research was supported by the European Commu-
nity’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agree-
ments nr 258191 (PROMISE Network of Excellence) and 288024 (LiMo-
SINe project), the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO)
under project nrs 640.004.802, 727.011.005, 612.001.116, HOR-11-10, the
Center for Creation, Content and Technology (CCCT), the BILAND project
funded by the CLARIN-nl program, the Dutch national program COM-
MIT, the ESF Research Network Program ELIAS, the Elite Network Shifts
project funded by the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences (KNAW), and the
Netherlands eScience Center under project number 027.012.105.
5. REFERENCES
[1] L. Byron and M. Wattenberg. Stacked graphs–geometry & aesthetics.

Visual. and Comp. Graphics, IEEE Trans., 14(6):1245–1252, 2008.

[2] S. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings in information

visualization: using vision to think. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.

lists of  inﬂuencer groupsFor example:- tweet streams of (important) politicians- tweet streams of companies and organizations- tweet streams from news   agents...Datastoredocuments storedin Elastic Search ThemeStreams backendcombines inﬂuencer groups with user queries or with themes to generate activity counts over time per group crawlerlists of  themesFor example:- economy- welfare- education - public security- immigration- defense- Europe  ...ABCDEcombinedseparate1078