#trapped! Social Media Search System Requirements for

Emergency Management Professionals

Stefan Raue, Leif Azzopardi and Chris W. Johnson

School of Computing Science

University of Glasgow

{stefan.raue, leif.azzopardi, christopher.johnson}@glasgow.ac.uk

Scotland, UK

ABSTRACT
Social media provides a new and potentially rich source of
information for emergency management services. However,
extracting the relevant information from such streams poses
a number of diﬃcult challenges. In this short paper, we sur-
vey emergency management professionals to ascertain how
social media is used when responding to incidents, the search
strategies that they undertake, and the challenges that they
face when using social media streams. This research in-
dicates that emergency management professionals employ
two main strategies when searching social media streams:
keyword-centric and account-centric search strategies. Fur-
thermore, current search interfaces are inadequate regarding
the requirements of command and control environments in
the emergency management domain, where the process of
information seeking is collaborative in nature and needs to
support multiple information seekers.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Informa-
tion Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Re-
trieval
Keywords: Information Seeking, Emergency Management

1.

INTRODUCTION

“Building 9 has collapsed. I’m stuck, help please! #trapped ”

More often than not, when an emergency or disaster strikes
victims and onlookers use social media platforms such as
Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Flickr to communicate with
friends, family and others [9, 8, 11]. However, unlike the
opening message which makes a speciﬁc request for help in a
particular location, most communications about an incident
are not as speciﬁc, nor as informative when it comes to using
this information to support and aid emergency responders.
During the early stages of an incident, emergency responders
are often faced with more questions than answers. Informa-
tion like this may be invaluable in saving someone’s life, but
it may also be a hoax. Consequently, teams of experts from
various domains have to collate and ﬁlter information about
the event, e.g. location, severity, and magnitude, from many

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

diﬀerent sources (traditional, i.e. phone calls from citizens,
incoming CB radio communications from police oﬃcers, etc
as well as new sources coming from social media platforms).
The response team must cooperate to make sense of the sit-
uation, by considering context, as well as their experiences
and skills. Any errors made during this process may lead to
an inappropriate response to the incident; putting lives and
property at risk.

It has been argued by Palen, Vieweg and others [9, 8] that
social media platforms provide new and potentially valuable
source of information, which if harnessed correctly could be
of tremendous beneﬁt to emergency response teams. With
the real-time nature of social media platforms and an in-
ternet enabled mobile phone in the hands of most citizens
there is an abundance of information now ﬂooding in when
a crisis occurs. However, as alluded to already, most of this
data is not useful for emergency responders, it is potentially
unreliable, uncorroborated, vague, misleading, obvious and
already known, or otherwise irrelevant. This means that
emergency response teams need to deal with the abundance
of potentially relevant and actionable information, and then
sort through the information carefully to determine its qual-
ity, authoritativeness, speciﬁcity, and ultimately its utility
and usefulness in responding to the situation.

Emergency responders work in time-critical and safety-
critical environments, thus decisions made in command and
control will aﬀect the outcome of an adverse event (i.e. where
to dispatch and allocate the ﬁnite resources at hand). Dur-
ing an incident, or if one is imminent, the information needs
will be determined by the context of that event. Emergency
management services will need to know what type of haz-
ard or crisis they are faced with, what is the severity of the
event, where is its occurring location, and how many people
are likely to be aﬀected. Therefore, the collation of infor-
mation from various oﬃcial and unoﬃcial sources, such as
social media platforms, plays a pivotal role in supporting
their situation awareness [2].

To date there have been numerous works that have shown
the utility of social media to help in particular situations [6,
3, 12], for example, providing ﬂood warnings, mapping ﬁre
out breaks and so on. However, most of the time this re-
search is done post-hoc, and outwith the context of emer-
gency response teams. Other work has focused on the de-
velopment of IR systems that follow, ﬁlter and map events
in real-time such as Twitcident [1] or Crisees [7]. Such tools
aim to provide emergency responders and the public with
an overview of an event, however, again such tools have
been developed without a deeper appreciation and under-

1073standing of the users that will be using these tools. Also in
order to develop appropriate, context-sensitive systems that
support the process of gathering, ﬁltering and analyzing the
publicly available social media information streams, a better
understanding of the users, their search needs and the larger
context of handling an emergency response is required.

Consequently, this paper aims to provide an insight into
current search behavior of emergency management profes-
sionals. To this end, we undertake a survey of such profes-
sionals to ascertain how they rate the importance of social
media information, what problems they face when dealing
with large information streams, what actors are involved in
their processes, and how information from social media plat-
forms can be incorporated within their current emergency
management procedures.

2. METHOD: REQUIREMENTS SURVEY
To ascertain the needs and requirements of emergency re-
sponse and management teams we devised an online sur-
vey instrument to capture how social media was being used
within organizations responding to such incidents. The sur-
vey was designed for individuals who are involved in emer-
gency management (EM). The survey contained 64 ques-
tions which were divided into ﬁve sections:

1. demographic information and expertise,

2. organizational and individual use of social media,

3. information seeking behavior,

4. technology acceptance of social media platforms, and

5. open ended questions on social media platforms for

emergency management.

2.1 Survey Structure and Background

Part 1 of the survey contained standard demographic ques-
tions along with questions about their current position, how
long they have worked in that position/organization, which
department/organization and at which location. Since pre-
vious studies on cognitive aspects of information seeking
processes observed substantial diﬀerences in search behav-
ior between novices and experts [4, 10]. We also included
questions regarding the participants level of IT expertise,
their usage of social media, level of seniority and experience
in their current position. In part 2, participants were asked
about which social media platforms they used during a crisis,
how they utilized them, and how useful each platform was.
We speciﬁcally asked about: Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn,
Google+, YouTube, MyVideo, Flickr, Instagram, Pinterest,
Personal Blogs, and others.

In part 3, we asked several questions regarding their infor-
mation seeking behavior. Speciﬁcally, about the diﬃculty,
value, quantity, reliability, and veriﬁability of the informa-
tion on social media platforms. Also, we wanted to know
how easily or possible it was to share and communicate their
ﬁndings within their team/organization. With recent nat-
ural and man-made adverse events, such as Virginia Tech
Shooting (2007) or the Japan Earthquake (2012), highlight-
ing the role of social media platforms as a way to mediate
global, real-time communication, allowing the public to cre-
ate and comment on such content, we were particularly in-
terested in how this surge in information aﬀected emergency
response teams. For example, reports in the aftermath of
the Haiti Earthquake (2010) and the public disorder events

in England (2011) made it clear that the volume of user-
generated content (UGC) created on social media platforms
could support emergency response agencies to increase situ-
ation awareness. However, it also has the potential to over-
load decision makers with too much information [5]. So we
included a number of questions asking participants whether
they felt overloaded by the abundance of information, and
how they perceived the quality and usefulness of the user-
generated content. In part 4, we examined how accepting
such organizations are in using social media platforms and
how user-generated content could improve their current pro-
cesses.

For sections 2-5 questions were either open ended or asked
participants to indicate their level of agreement on a seven-
point Likert scale. When presenting our results, we have
reduce the seven-point Likert scales for agreement to three
categories: (i) disagree, (ii) neutral i.e. neither agree nor
disagree, and (iii) agree. The survey was designed to take
participants approximately 30 minutes to complete. Three
follow-up interviews were then conducted with selected par-
ticipants to gain further insights into their search behaviors.
2.2 Representativeness and Sample Size

The emergency management domain consists of many dif-
ferent types of organizations, such as police forces, ﬁre and
rescue services (FRS), or ambulance services. In order to ob-
tain a large and representative sample of participants from
the EM domain, the survey was sent to (i) organizations with
statutory duties as emergency responders as well as to (ii)
other professional EM bodies, such as the Emergency Plan-
ning Society (EPS). Overall using a number of mailing lists,
the survey was distributed to approximately 350 individuals
within the United Kingdom. Within three weeks we received
100 responses, of which 70 were fully completed, and the
other 30 only partially completed which we excluded from
this analysis. The resulting response rate was approximately
20%. Participants reported to work in positions such as
media manager, public communications oﬃcer, civil contin-
gency coordinator, and emergency planning oﬃcer and were
linked to a variety of organizations, such as council/local au-
thority (37.14%), police force (31.43%), FRS or government
department (14.28%), health board (5.71%) and other (e.g.
maritime and coastguard agency) (11.43%).

3. RESULTS

In presenting the results from the survey, we will focus
mainly on presenting our ﬁndings from part 2 and 3 of the
survey on information seeking behavior of emergency man-
agement professionals.
3.1 Demographics

Most participants (N=70) reported to be in their cur-
rent position for more than three years (64.29%) and work-
ing in their current organization for more than three years
(21.43%), more than 5 years (21.43%) and more than 10
years (42.86%). It is therefore assumed that a majority of
the participants is well aware of their roles and responsibili-
ties in the emergency management environment. In regards
to their self-assessed IT experience, participants (N=69) re-
ported to be competent (46.38%), proﬁcient (33.33%) and
expert (10.14%). When asked about their level of social
media experience, participants (N=69) reported to be com-
petent (34.78%), proﬁcient (28.99%) and expert (5.8%).

10743.1.1 Perceived Value of UGC during Incidents
In order to understand the motivation to search for user-
generated content during incidents, we asked participants
about the perceived value of information exchanged on so-
cial media platforms. When asked if there is too much valu-
able information 13.23% of the participants agreed, 19.12%
neither agreed nor disagreed and an overall of 67.65% dis-
agreed with the statement (N=68). During a follow-up in-
terview one participant said that “there can never be too
much valuable information”. However, when asked if there
is not enough valuable information 35.82% agreed - a further
19.40% of the participants were undecided (N=68). Inter-
estingly 44.78% perceived social media platforms to contain
enough valuable information during an incident. These re-
sults may seem contradictory but suggest that while valuable
information exists within UGC ﬁnding the right information
poses a signiﬁcant challenge.

3.1.2 Finding UGC during Incidents
Before asking the professionals to detail their search strate-
gies, we asked them about the diﬃculty they had in ﬁnding
information about an incident. 11.76% of the participants
perceived it to be hard or very hard to ﬁnd any informa-
tion at all (N=68). However, 69.11% perceived this task as
easy, while 19.12% neither agreed nor disagreed about the
statement. This seems at odds with the previous ﬁndings,
however, this was clariﬁed during the interviews when par-
ticipants pointed out it was easy to ﬁnd general and causal
information about an incident, but not speciﬁc, relevant, and
useful information, which could be used to inform decision-
making. When asked about the ease to formulate their in-
formation needs, 38.24% of the participants found it easy to
express their needs, while 23.53% perceived it to be diﬃcult
(N=68). During the follow-up interviews, participants noted
that they had a very clear picture of their information needs
and felt conﬁdent in expressing them most of the time.

Search user interfaces for social media search provide nu-
merous ways to search/query for information. Table 1 pro-
vides an overview of the types of search functionality used
by emergency management professionals to formulate their
search queries.

Looking at the results, there seemed to be two general
methods of ﬁndings information. The ﬁrst one is through the
formulation of a query expressing information needs, similar
to standard web search interfaces. Additionally, content is
followed by using social media speciﬁc syntax such as hash-
tags in the micro-blogging platform Twitter. The second
method appears to be acccount-centric, meaning that the
search for information starts with a speciﬁc account or a list
of accounts, rather than a search query.

3.1.3 Filtering UGC during Incidents
There is also the need for additional ﬁltering of informa-
tion. A piece of user-generated content considered to be
topical relevant, e.g. by matching a number of keywords,
may actually be irrelevant for considering in the emergency
management environment. Information can also be classi-
ﬁed as misinformation and disinformation and thus should
also not be considered in the decision-making process. When
asked if there is too much misleading information on social
media platforms during an incident 42.65% of the partici-
pants (N=68) agreed, 27.94% disagreed and 29.41% neither
agreed nor disagreed. Subsequently the majority of the par-

ticipants reported the assessment of importance and veracity
of user-generated content to be diﬃcult - see Table 1.

In order to understand the process of veriﬁcation and rel-
evance judgment better, we asked what role the user ac-
count/proﬁle of the message creator plays during the assess-
ment - see Table 1. From this we conclude that the majority
of emergency management professionals surveyed (74.63%,
N=68) not only base their relevance judgment on factors
related to topic, geography or time, which are mainly de-
scribing the context of the incident, but also to the notion of
trust of the information provider. The speciﬁc factors, that
are usually taken into consideration during the assessment
of a user proﬁle were not surveyed and may be part of future
research, as it would be important for future systems design
to understand what these judgments are based on. However,
when looking at search strategies 71.46% of the participants
(N=68) reported to search for information by looking at al-
ready known accounts. This leads to believe that previous
positive or negative experiences with an account eﬀects the
trust assessment for future incidents. Other methods men-
tioned to assess information in regards to relevance, trust
and veracity were visualization using geographical informa-
tion systems to detect accumulation of similar content in a
close proximity of the incident site and cross-validation of
information across multiple information sources.
3.1.4 Collaborative Work with UGC during Incidents
The exchange of information relevant to assess the situ-
ation and to facilitate informed decision-making is another
key requirement for any information processing system in
the emergency management domain. The ability to ex-
change information with other organizations during an inci-
dent was perceived to be important by 46.16% of the organi-
zations (N=31). We therefore asked participants about the
ease to transfer ﬁndings into other systems and the ease to
exchange social media search results with colleagues inside
and outside their organizations.

During incidents every organization involved in the re-
sponse will only have limited information processing resources
available.
In order to use these resources more eﬃciently,
tasks such as ﬁltering, annotating or assessing information
should be conducted in a collaborative manner. However,
when participants (N=67) were asked if they are relying on
other organizations to ﬁlter information only 28.37% agreed,
whereas 37.31% were neither agreed nor disagreed and 34.33%
disagreed. This is surprising given that the majority of emer-
gency management professionals surveyed indicated to con-
duct account-centric information ﬁltering.

4. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In this paper we surveyed 70 professionals working in
emergency management and response environments to as-
certain requirements for using social media search systems.
Despite the low signal-to-noise ratio in social media streams,
user-generated content was seen by professionals as a timely
and potentially useful source of information that could in-
form the decision-making process. However,
in order to
incorporate data from these information streams, profes-
sionals sought information that was not only topically rel-
evant, but also geographically and temporally and perhaps
most importantly that it was veriﬁable and from a cred-
ible source. Due to the complexity of this task, partici-
pants reported that this assessment of user-generated con-

107510.45%
8.95%
31.35%
10.44%

When looking for relevant/important information during an incident... Disagree Neutral Agree
13.43% 76.13%
...I am mainly using keyword search to ﬁnd information
...I identify speciﬁc keywords/hashtags to follow an incident
17.91% 73.14%
31.34% 37.31%
...I ﬁlter information on the basis of geo-locations
...I look at for reliable sources/users and track their account
17.91% 71.64%
When searching for information on social media platforms
Disagree Neutral Agree
during an incident it is hard to...
16.18% 46.00%
...identify important information
...verify information
17.65% 58.83%
When searching for relevant/important information during an incident Disagree Neutral Agree
I am looking at the proﬁle of the message creator to ...
...judge the relevance of information
...judge the trustworthiness of information
When searching for information on social media platforms
during an incident it is easy to...
...transfer my ﬁndings into other systems
...share my ﬁndings with colleagues inside my organization.
...share my ﬁndings with colleagues outside my organization.

16.42% 74.63%
17.91% 74.63%
Disagree Neutral Agree

29.42%
25.37%
26.87%

32.35% 38.24%
23.88% 50.76%
23.88% 49.25%

38.24%
23.52%

8.95%
7.46%

Table 1: Search strategies and tactics employed when information seeking (N=68).

tent in regards to relevance and veracity was very diﬃcult.
When searching for user-generated content, we found that
emergency management professionals employed two main
strategies: keyword-centric search and account-centric
search. The former relies on the expression of information
needs by formulating search queries using keywords or plat-
form speciﬁc syntax, such as hashtags. Additional search
operators, e.g.
to ﬁlter on the basis of geo-information,
though, were not routinely used. Account-centric search
for user-generated content entailed ﬁnding a reliable source
then following that user’s experience of the incident. The
majority of professionals (74.63%, N=68) reported that this
assessment of user-generated content regarding trust and
relevance was based on the proﬁle of the content creator.
Therefore, future social media search systems will also need
to provide functionality to support emergency professionals
in this assessment.

Emergency management environments also bring together
a number of actors from various backgrounds and organiza-
tions. Thus, in order to establish a joint understanding of
the situation, the information seeking and processing needs
to be collaborative. This was regarded to be very impor-
tant to facilitate the sharing and communication of ﬁndings
within response teams. Thus, search interfaces for emer-
gency management need to be collaborative. In future work,
we shall explore the speciﬁc needs of collaborative infor-
mation seeking and sharing in order to design and build
a search system tailored to the emergency management en-
vironment.

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank all partic-
ipants within the Scottish Responder Community and the
members of the Emergency Planning Society who took the
time and eﬀort to complete this survey despite the high num-
ber of severe weather related incidents.

5. REFERENCES
[1] F. Abel, C. Hauﬀ, G.-J. Houben, R. Stronkman, and

K. Tao. Semantics+ ﬁltering+ search= twitcident.
exploring information in social web streams. In Proc.
of the 23rd ACM Hypertext, pages 285–294, 2012.

[2] M. R. Endsley. Toward a theory of situation awareness

in dynamic systems. J. of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 37(1):32–64, 1995.

[3] M. F. Goodchild. Citizens as sensors: the world of

volunteered geography. GeoJournal, 69:211–221, 2007.

[4] Q. Gu, D. Mendonca, and D. Wu. An exploration of

information-seeking behavior in emergency
management. In IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics,
volume 2, pages 1798–1803, 2003.

[5] HMIC. The rules of engagement: A review of the

August 2011 disorders. Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of
Constabulary, 2011.

[6] A. L. Hughes and L. Palen. Twitter adoption and use

in mass convergence and emergency events. In
proceedings of the 6th International ISCRAM
Conference, Gothenburg, Sweden, May 2009.

[7] D. Maxwell, S. Raue, L. Azzopardi, C. Johnson, and

S. Oates. Crisees: Real-time monitoring of social
media streams to support crisis management. ECIR,
pages 573–575, 2012.

[8] L. Palen, K. M. Anderson, G. Mark, J. Martin,

D. Sicker, M. Palmer, and D. Grunwald. A vision for
technology-mediated support for public participation
& assistance in mass emergencies & disasters. In Proc.
of the 2010 ACM-BCS VCSC, page 8, 2010.

[9] L. Palen and S. B. Liu. Citizen communications in
crisis: anticipating a future of ict-supported public
participation. In ACM SIGCHI, pages 727–736, 2007.

[10] H. Saito and K. Miwa. A cognitive study of

information seeking processes in the www: the eﬀects
of searcher’s knowledge and experience. In Proc. of the
2nd WISE, volume 1, pages 321–327, 2001.

[11] A. Sheth. Citizen sensing, social signals, and enriching
human experience. Internet Comp., 13(4):87–92, 2009.

[12] L. Spinsanti and F. Ostermann. Retrieve volunteered
geographic information for forest ﬁre. In Proc, of the
2nd IIR Workshop, 2011.

1076