ProductSeeker: Entity-based Product Retrieval for

E-Commerce

Hongzhi Wang

wangzh@hit.edu.cn

Xiaodong Zhang

Jianzhong Li

Harbin Institute of Technology

zxdhuge@gmail.com lijzh@hit.edu.cn

Hong Gao

honggao@hit.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
The retrieval results of online products information in e-
commerce web sites are often diﬃcult for users to use be-
cause of diﬀerent descriptions for the same product. This
paper proposes ProductSeeker, a product retrieval system
organizing results according to their referring real-world en-
tities for the conveniences of users. In the demonstration,
we will present our system providing friendly interface to
retrieve fresh product information and reﬁning results ac-
cording to feedback.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous

Keywords
Entity Resolution, Information Retrieval, E-Commerce

1. ENTITY-BASED PRODUCT SEARCH

People often buy products online from e-commerce web

sites such as ebay (www.ebay.com), Amazon(www.amazon.com)
and Taobao (www.taobao.com). These web sites are thus
a rich sources of products which are convenient for users
to ﬁnd required products. Retrieving proper products for
users is however a challenging task as the names of the same
product are often diﬀerent especially in web 2.0 sites such as
ebay and Taobao where products are described by various
users instead of professional managers. For the convenience
of users to ﬁnd proper products and compare the prices for
the same products from diﬀerent sellers, it is necessary to
group the products referring to the same real-world object
together. This is the task of entity resolution [1], which is to
recognize the data objects referring to the same real-world
entity.

Even though many techniques have been proposed for en-
tity resolution, most of them are not designed for products
on e-commerce web sites, the object descriptions in which
are in great diversity.
[2] focuses on the entity resolution

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

for products. However, it just performs entity resolution
according to the product code without considering detailed
description information. As a result, such technique is not
suitable for complex products on web 2.0 e-commerce web
sites, even though it is eﬀective in some cases. Additionally,
it does not involve entity resolution in information retrieval
for products.

To apply entity resolution to enhance information retrieval
for product information, we develop ProductSeeker, a sys-
tem as a wrapper for e-commerce web sites. ProduceSeeker
groups the search results from e-commerce web sites accord-
ing to the referred real-world entity. The demonstration
presents the following features of ProductSeeker:
(cid:129) Convenience In ProductSeeker, search results are orga-
nized according to the real-world products.
It provides
convenience for users to view products in group. From the
grouped results, users can compare the price and quality
of products referring to the same entity.
(cid:129) Freshness In web 2.0 E-commerce web sites, product in-
formation updates frequently. To avoid outdated prod-
uct information, it is crucial to keep information fresh-
ness. Thus in ProductSeeker, for each query, we choose
to crawl related information from data sources instantly.
As a result, for each search, results of ProductSeeker are
synchronous with the information in data sources.
(cid:129) User Feedback Sometimes, products have insuﬃcient in-
formation for entity resolution. To handle such such cases,
we use the feedback of users to enhance the query results.
(cid:129) Light Weight In our system, we do not maintain any
database for product information but just a corpus for
entity resolution. Thus our system does not require pow-
erful server.

2. OVERVIEW OF THE PROTOTYPE

As shown in Figure 1, ProductSeeker has 4 key modules:
The input interface accepts the keywords from users. Then
the Query Broker transmits these keywords to e-commerce
web sites. Then the names and links of selected products are
sent back to ProductSeeker. In the Entity Resolution com-
ponent, returned products are clustered according to the
referred real-world product and a name as the summary of
the products in this cluster is generated for each cluster.
After that, the clusters are ranked according to features of
the cluster and ﬁnal results are shown to users based on the
clustering and ranking.
If users ﬁnd some improper clus-
tered products or pick some similar products, the feedback

1085Interface

Keywords

Clustered Results

User Feedback

reclusted results

Query Broker

Keywords

Entity Resolution

Feedback

Results

Web Site

......

Web Site

Figure 1: System Architecture

component re-clusters the products according to the user
feedback.

We brieﬂy introduce the techniques of entity resolution,

cluster labelling, cluster ranking and feedback.

Entity Resolution For eﬀective entity resolution, we ex-
tract attribute set from product titles and description infor-
mation. Initially, all attributes share the same weight. The
similarity between two products is deﬁned as the similarity
between corresponding attribute sets. We also use classiﬁ-
cation information from original web sites. Two products
within a class and with the similarity larger than a thresh-
old are considered to satisfy the relationship of referring the
same real-world object. The entity resolution performs clus-
tering based on such relationship.

Cluster Labeling Each cluster could be described with
common attributes of attribute sets in it. To extract the
most representative feature for each cluster, we use TF/IDF
model to assign a scores on each attribute. The two at-
tributes with the highest scores in each cluster are used as
the label of each cluster.

Cluster Ranking We deﬁne the rank function for the clus-
ters as the weighted sum of three parameters, i.e. the simi-
larity between clusters and keywords, the average similarity
between pairs of products in the cluster as well as the num-
ber of products in the cluster. Clusters are ranked according
to the rank function. In each cluster, products are ranked
according to the orders in data sources.

Feedback We use two kinds of feedback information. One
is changing the cluster of a product p from C1 to C2.
It
means that the changed product has lower similarity with
the products in C1 but larger similarity than C2. Thus the
weights of attributes shared by p and the products in C2 are
increased while the those shared by p and C1 are decreased.
The second is that during one query, the weights of common
attributes of products clicked by users are increased.

3. DEMONSTRATION

We plan to demonstration ProductSeeker in understand-
ing the principles of entity-based search as well as the im-
pact of its accuracy. Since ProductSeeker runs a wrapper on
existing e-commerce web site with a search input box, our
system can process keywords in open ﬁelds. To demonstrate
the features of our system, we have prepared a set of key-
words with multiple related products and some of products
with more than one descriptions such as “smart phone”, “kin-
dle”, “levi’s” and “lamy”. Users can also input any keywords
for the search.

Figure 2: Keywords Input

Figure 3: Feedback Interfaces

For the convenience of search, our system provides the
similar interface as those in current e-commerce search en-
gines, as shown in Figure 2. In the interface, a user could
select preferred data sources or all data sources. When the
search button is clicked, the search results are grouped by
referred real-world products. For each cluster, a label is gen-
erated from the products belonging to it. When a label is
clicked, the titles of products in corresponding cluster are
shown with links to original data source. An example for
result page is shown in Figure 3.

For further interaction with the system, if a user think
one product should belong to cluster C, such product could
be dragged to cluster C, as shown in Figure 3. Then the
search results will be re-clustered according to the feedback
from users. Users could reﬁne the results until the search
goals are achieved.

4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This paper was partially supported by NGFR 973 grant

2012CB316200, NSFC grant 61003046, 61111130189 and NGFR
863 grant 2012AA011004. Key Laboratory of Data Engi-
neering and Knowledge Engineering (Renmin University of
China), Ministry of Education (No.KF2011003)

5. REFERENCES
[1] L. Getoor and A. Machanavajjhala. Entity resolution:

Theory, practice & open challenges. PVLDB,
5(12):2018–2019, 2012.

[2] H. K¨opcke, A. Thor, S. Thomas, and E. Rahm.

Tailoring entity resolution for matching product oﬀers.
In EDBT, pages 545–550, 2012.

1086