X-ENS: Semantic Enrichment of Web Search Results

at Real-Time

Pavlos Fafalios and Yannis Tzitzikas

Institute of Computer Science, FORTH-ICS, GREECE, and
Computer Science Department, University of Crete, GREECE

{fafalios,tzitzik}@ics.forth.gr

ABSTRACT
While more and more semantic data are published on the
Web, an important question is how typical web users can ac-
cess and exploit this body of knowledge. Although, existing
interaction paradigms in semantic search hide the complex-
ity behind an easy-to-use interface, they have not managed
to cover common search needs.
In this paper, we present
X-ENS (eXplore ENtities in Search), a web search application
that enhances the classical, keyword-based, web searching
with semantic information, as a means to combine the pros
of both Semantic Web standards and common Web Search-
ing. X-ENS identiﬁes entities of interest in the snippets of
the top search results which can be further exploited in a
faceted interaction scheme, and thereby can help the user
to limit the - often very large - search space to those hits
that contain a particular piece of information. Moreover,
X-ENS permits the exploration of the identiﬁed entities by
exploiting semantic repositories.1
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.0 [Information Systems Applications]: General
Keywords
semantic post processing of search results; entity mining;
Linked Data
1.

INTRODUCTION

While more and more semantic data are published on the
Web, the question of how typical web users can access this
body of knowledge becomes of crucial importance. There is
a growing amount of research on interaction paradigms that
allow end users to proﬁt from the expressive power of Seman-
tic Web standards. These paradigms range from keyword
search (e.g. [2]), faceted browsing and exploration (e.g. [1])
to natural language question answering (e.g. [3]). Although
most hide the complexity behind an easy-to-use interface,
regular users do not take advantage of using them. Their

1

A deployment of X-ENS is available at http://139.91.183.72/x-ens/.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

Figure 1: An indicative screen dump of X-ENS.

usefulness in comparison to common web search engines (es-
pecially for regular users) has not been proved, mainly be-
cause they aim at providing the user with (linked) data and
relationships between these data, instead of providing links
to web pages.

To address this issue we focus on enriching the classi-
cal web search engines with Linked Open Data (LOD), as a
means to combine the pros of both semantic web standards
and common web searching. X-ENS is a web application that
identiﬁes at query-time entities of interest (i.e. LOD of a
particular class, e.g. Persons, Locations, Organizations, etc.)
in the snippets of the top results returned by a search system
and allows the user to explore at real-time their properties.
The entities are exploited in a faceted and session-based in-
teraction scheme, allowing the user to narrow the search
space to those hits that contain a particular piece of infor-
mation. Figure 1 depicts an indicative screen dump.
2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

The process. We focus on a dynamic approach where
no pre-processing of the resources has been done. Speciﬁ-
cally, the user a) submits a keyword query through X-ENS’s
web interface, b) X-ENS fetches the top results of the same
query from the underlying search system, c) it applies entity
mining in the snippets of the results, d) ranks the discovered
entities, e) groups them according to the categories they be-
long to, f) ranks the categories, and ﬁnally g) presents the
categorized entities in a faceted interface. At that point, the
user has many (session-based) options for interacting with
the search system that we analyze in Section 2.1.

Discovering entities in the results. We currently use
GateAnnie2 for entity mining.
In our setting it takes as
input a set of document snippets, speciﬁcally those of the

2http://gate.ac.uk/ie/annie.html

1089top-L hits of the query answer, and it returns as output a
set of entity lists (one list for each category). We have au-
tomated the procedure of adding a new category of entities
in GateAnnie, i.e. we can easily conﬁgure the entity names
that are interesting for the application at hand (e.g. LOD
of a particular type). As we will see later (Section 2.2), for
deﬁning the entities of interest we can exploit any semantic
repository that is accessible via a SPARQL endpoint.

Ranking of entities. The user submits a keyword query
q, and let A be the set of the top-L hits (e.g. L = 200)
returned by the underlying search system. For an a 2 A,
let rank(a) be its position in the answer (the ﬁrst hit has
rank equal to 1, the second 2, and so on). We apply entity
mining in A, get a set of entities E, and rank E according to
, where
the formula: Score(e) =

∑
a2docs(e) ((jAj+1)(cid:0)rank(a))

jAj(jAj+1)

2

∑

docs(e) denote the elements of A in which an entity e has
been identiﬁed. We can see that the entities occurring in
the top hits are promoted, i.e. we exploit the ranking of the
documents. The rational behind this ranking formula is that
the top hits in the ranked list probably contain more useful
entities that the last hits since they are considered “better”
results.

Ranking of categories. For a category c, if inst(c)
denotes the entities that fall in c, we rank the categories
e2inst(c) Score(e).
according to the formula: Score(c) =
We can see that the categories which contain the more highly
scored entities are promoted.
2.1 Interaction Model

Faceted search-like exploration of the results. The
results of entity mining (LOD grouped in categories) are vi-
sualized and exploited according to the faceted exploration
interaction paradigm [4]: when the user clicks on an en-
tity, the hits are restricted to those that contain that entity
(Figure 1A). Speciﬁcally, the user is able to gradually select
entities from one or more categories and reﬁne the answer
set accordingly (the mechanism is session-based). If such se-
lections belong to the same category, they have disjunctive
(OR) semantics and if they belong to separate categories they
have conjunctive (AND) semantics.

On-click semantic exploration of LOD. There are
already vast amounts of structured information published
according to the principles of LOD. The availability of such
datasets enables the dynamic enrichment of the identiﬁed
entities with more information about them. In this way the
user not only can get useful information about an entity
without having to submit a new query, but he can also start
browsing the entities that are linked to that entity. However,
a question is which LOD datasets to use. We identify and
specify an appropriate dataset for each category of entities.
For example, DBpedia3 is appropriate for multiple categories
such as Organizations, Persons, Locations, etc.

Running one (SPARQL) query for each entity would be a
very expensive task, especially if the system has discovered
a lot of entities. For this reason, we oﬀer this service on
demand. Speciﬁcally when the user clicks on the small icon
at the right of an entity, the system at that time collects
more information about that entity which is visualized in a
popup window (Figure 1B). As we will see in Section 2.2, the
user is able to deﬁne a SPARQL endpoint and a SPARQL
template query for each distinct category of entities.

2.2 Conﬁgurability

We give particular emphasis on the conﬁgurability of X-
ENS. The administrator can specify various parameters of
X-ENS through a conﬁguration page (Figure 1C).

Specifying the underlying search system. We can
deﬁne the underlying search system (e.g. Bing) by giving an
OpenSearch4 description document. OpenSearch is a collec-
tion of simple formats for the sharing of search results and
the OpenSearch description document format can be used to
describe a search engine. Nevertheless, we could plug any
search system by creating the appropriate results parser.

Adding a new category of entities. We are able to
add a new category of entities by giving a category title and
a list of words/phrases. The list can be loaded by running a
SPARQL query over a knowledge base that oﬀers a SPARQL
endpoint. For example, we can run a SPARQL query over
DBpedia’s SPARQL endpoint that returns a list of all ob-
jects of rdf:type dbp-ont:TennisPlayer and thereby oﬀer
the ability to explore Tennis Players in the search results.

Specifying the underlying knowledge bases. We are
able to deﬁne how to semantically explore an identiﬁed en-
tity by giving a SPARQL template query and a SPARQL
endpoint for each category of entities that we want to of-
fer entity exploration. The SPARQL template query must
contain the character sequence <ENTITY> (including the <
and >). When a user asks for more information about an
entity, we read the template query of the category in which
the selected entity belongs and replace each occurrence of
<ENTITY> with the entity’s label name.
3. CONCLUSION

We described X-ENS, a web search application that en-
hances at real-time the classical web searching with seman-
tic information, as a means to combine the pros of both
semantic web standards and common web searching. X-ENS
is applicable to any search system that oﬀers textual results,
it does not require any pre-processing and it does not use
any caching scheme. It exploits at real-time semantic repos-
itories (i.e. the LOD cloud) for both conﬁguring the enti-
ties of interest and further exploring their properties. The
average response times of X-ENS highly depend on the un-
derlying search system, the knowledge bases that we exploit
(SPARQL endpoints) and the SPARQL queries that we run.

Acknowledgement. Work done in the context of iMa-
rine (FP7 Research Infrastructures, 2011-2014) and MUMIA
COST action (IC1002, 2010-2014).
4. REFERENCES
[1] S. Auer, C. Bizer, G. Kobilarov, J. Lehmann,

R. Cyganiak, and Z. Ives. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web
of open data. The Semantic Web, pages 722{735, 2007.

[2] A. Hogan, A. Harth, J. Umbrich, S. Kinsella,

A. Polleres, and S. Decker. Searching and browsing
linked data with SWSE: the semantic web search engine.
Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the
World Wide Web, 2011.

[3] V. Lopez, M. Pasin, and E. Motta. Aqualog: An

ontology-portable question answering system for the
semantic web. The Semantic Web: Research and
Applications, pages 135{166, 2005.

[4] G. Sacco and Y. Tzitzikas. Dynamic taxonomies and

faceted search, volume 25. Springer, 2009.

3http://dbpedia.org/

4http://www.opensearch.org/

1090