A Portable Multilingual Medical Directory by Automatic

Categorization of Wikipedia Articles

Fernando Ruiz-Rico,

María-Consuelo Rubio-Sánchez

University of Alicante

{frr, mcrs7}@alu.ua.es

David Tomás, Jose-Luis Vicedo

University of Alicante

{dtomas, vicedo}@dlsi.ua.es

ABSTRACT
Wikipedia has become one of the most important sources of
information available all over the world. However, the cate-
gorization of Wikipedia articles is not standardized and the
searches are mainly performed on keywords rather than con-
cepts. In this paper we present an application that builds
a hierarchical structure to organize all Wikipedia entries, so
that medical articles can be reached from general to particu-
lar, using the well known Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
thesaurus. Moreover, the language links between articles
will allow using the directory created in diﬀerent languages.
The ﬁnal system can be packed and ported to mobile devices
as a standalone oﬄine application.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.3 [Computer Applications]: Life and Medical Sciences;
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

General Terms
Algorithms, Languages

Keywords
Text classiﬁcation, Category ranking, Medical Subject Head-
ings, Wikipedia, jQuery Mobile, PhoneGap

1.

INTRODUCTION

Some web directories have gained popularity in the last
years. It is the case of the Open Directory Project (ODP),1
manually maintained by a large community of editors. Nowa-
days this directory stores more than ﬁve million sites, which
are classiﬁed on more than one million categories organized
hierarchically. This thesaurus is employed by other compa-
nies such as Alexa.2 This webpage allows users to get the

1http://www.dmoz.org/docs/en/about.html.
2http://www.alexa.com/company.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

most popular pages in a hierarchical tree, going from general
to particular categories.

Wikipedia is ranked by Alexa in the sixth position glob-
ally. Due to the large amount of information and the wide
number of subjects contained in Wikipedia, it is quite dif-
ﬁcult to develop an automatic system to categorize all its
contents into a standardized tree, such as those employed in
web directories. As in ODP, currently this task is carried
out manually by a large group of volunteers.

Our proposal tries to automatically identify medical Wiki-
pedia articles in order to provide an interface to access this
resource by categories as in a web directory. With this pur-
pose, we employ machine learning techniques to train and
ﬁlter relevant information on particular domains.

2. CLASSIFYING WIKIPEDIA ARTICLES

INTO MEDICAL CATEGORIES

Our classiﬁcation system takes Wikipedia articles as an
input and decides whether they are inside medical scope or
not, and in case they are, try to ﬁnd one or several cate-
gories where they could ﬁt. To achieve this goal, we need
a corpus containing a large amount of training data and a
categorization algorithm.

For the ﬁrst requirement, MEDLINE3 provides us with
millions of free documents covering thousands of medical
subjects. The thesaurus employed to hierarchically catego-
rize every bibliographic entry in this database is known as
MeSH.4 Thus, we have a large corpus consisting on more
than 2 million documents associated to more than 25,000
topics in the MeSH thesaurus. Due to the popularity and
free availability of these resources, a fully functional inter-
face is currently available to get all training data by means
of simple queries, such as “Diseases category[majr]” which
retrieves all articles related to any disease (the expansion is
done automatically by the system [3]). All these consider-
ations have been taken into account to choose this corpus,
since it may lead us to enhance the results and simplify the
maintenance and future upgrades of our application.

Regarding the second requirement, we must consider the
size of the data we are working with. Our proposal employs
our own classiﬁcation algorithm, namely NEWPAR [5], de-
signed to work with large corpora. This algorithm has been

3Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online:
http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed.
4Medical Subject Headings: http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
mesh.

1099Figure 1: Navigation example to access Wikipedia
pages related to Cardiovascular Diseases. The num-
ber of available articles is shown on the left and the
list containing the links appears on the right.

previously employed in real time applications on medical
domain [6, 7].

3. MULTILINGUAL SCENARIO

The classiﬁcation algorithm mentioned above will only
handle documents written in English to complete both the
training phase with the MEDLINE documents and the sub-
sequent oﬄine classiﬁcation of Wikipedia articles. This pro-
cess is transparent to the ﬁnal user, since it is done through
a batch process. To achieve this goal, each entry in the XML
ﬁle containing all the summaries of Wikipedia articles5 has
been transformed into plain text and classiﬁed in order to
provide a ranked list of links for each particular topic.

Both Wikipedia articles and MeSH vocabulary are avail-
able in diﬀerent languages, and links between English ver-
sions and other languages are provided in both resources,
making it possible to develop a multilingual application. Al-
though the documents are originally classiﬁed in English, if
the user chooses another language the system only has to
ﬁnd the correspondences in either the MeSH entries or the
pages in Wikipedia.

As it is shown in Figure 1 (left), the user selects a lan-
guage and automatically gets a list of topics followed by the
number of Wikipedia related articles. More particular top-
ics can be accessed navigating down the MeSH tree. The
user can ﬁnally get the links to each article by clicking on
category name.

In order to enrich the information provided to the user,
our application extracts (this is done also in an oﬄine phase)
a brief description of the suggested links to Wikipedia pages,
extracted from the XML dump ﬁles of each language as
shown in Figure 1 (right). Finally the whole contents can
be accessed through the ranked links as shown in Figure 2.

4. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

The system is built in a way that allows being fully op-
erated as a standalone oﬄine application, that is, without

5http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Data_dumps.

Figure 2: Example of the contents of the ﬁrst two
Wikipedia articles most related to Cardiovascular
Diseases topic.

the need for Internet connection. The interface on the client
side has been developed using jQuery Mobile [4], a library
which allows to write HTML and Javascript source code
that can be interpreted by almost any device containing a
simple browser. This ensures the possibility to use the ap-
plication in most devices (both mobile and non-mobile plat-
forms) and also in any of the existing operating systems.
We also provide the users with the native code [2] by using
the PhoneGap [1] framework, as it allows to create mobile
apps using standardized web APIs. The ﬁnal result is an
application that can run on any kind of computers through
a website (http://www.lookforwiki.com) and that can also
be compiled and installed to get it working natively with a
single codebase on systems such as Android, iOS, Windows,
Blackberry, webOS and Symbian.

5. REFERENCES
[1] S. Allen, V. Graupera, and L. Lundrigan. Phonegap.
Pro Smartphone Cross-Platform Development, pages
131–152, 2010.

[2] A. Charland and B. Leroux. Mobile application

development: web vs. native. Communications of the
ACM, 54(5):49–53, 2011.

[3] Z. Lu, W. Kim, and W. J. Wilbur. Evaluation of query
expansion using mesh in pubmed. Information retrieval,
12(1):69–80, 2009.

[4] J. Reid. jQuery Mobile. O’Reilly Germany, 2011.
[5] F. Ruiz-Rico, J.-L. Vicedo, and M.-C. Rubio-S´anchez.
Newpar: an automatic feature selection and weighting
schema for category ranking. In Proceedings of
DocEng-06, 6th ACM symposium on Document
engineering, pages 128–137, 2006.

[6] F. Ruiz-Rico, J.-L. Vicedo, and M.-C. Rubio-S´anchez.
Multilingual assistant for medical diagnosing and drug
prescription based on category ranking. In 22nd
International Conference on Computational Linguistics:
Demonstration Papers, pages 169–172. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2008.

[7] F. Ruiz-Rico, J.-L. Vicedo, and M.-C. Rubio-S´anchez.
Medline abstracts classiﬁcation based on noun phrases
extraction. Biomedical Engineering Systems and
Technologies, pages 507–519, 2009.

1100