Information Seeking in Digital Cultural Heritage with

PATHS

Mark M. Hall,
Paul D. Clough,

Samuel Fernando,

Paula Goodale,
Mark Stevenson
Shefﬁeld University
S1 4DP, Shefﬁeld, UK
{m.mhall,p.d.clough,
s.fernando,p.goodale,

r.m.stevenson}@shefﬁeld.ac.uk

Eneko Agirre,
Arantxa Otegi,

Aitor Soroa

Donostia, Spain

{e.agirre,arantza.otegi,

a.soroa}@ehu.es

University of the Basque

Country

Kate Fernie,
Jillian Grifﬁths
MDR Partners
United Kingdom

kate.fernie@mdrpartners.com
jillian.grifﬁths@mdrprojects.com

ABSTRACT
Current Information Retrieval systems for digital cultural
heritage support only the actual search aspect of the in-
formation seeking process. This demonstration presents the
second PATHS system which provides the exploration, anal-
ysis, and sense-making features to support the full informa-
tion seeking process.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval; H.5.3 [Information Interfaces and
Presentation]: Group and Organization Interfaces

Keywords
exploration; information seeking; interactive information re-
trieval; demonstration

INTRODUCTION

1.
Current Information Retrieval (IR) systems in the domain
of digital cultural heritage provide good access for experts
through the standard search-box paradigm [8], as these users
are familiar with the collections, have speciﬁc information
needs, and know which keywords to use to satisfy these in-
formation needs. However, for users who are new to the
collections or do not have a speciﬁc information need the
search box presents an almost insurmountable obstacle [9].
Additionally these IR systems only support a small fraction
of the information seeking process [3, 5], forcing users to
augment the IR systems with other tools.

To support the whole information seeking process for both
experts and novices, IR systems are required that provide an

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

initial overview over the collection [2], functions for explor-
ing collections [4] such as thesauri [7] and faceted browsing
[1], somewhere to collect potentially relevant items [5], and
ﬁnally the ability to organise the items into a sense-making
structure.

The PATHS (Personalised Access To cultural Heritage
Spaces) project aims to address this issue through a combi-
nation of content pre-processing and front-end application
functionality. The demo presented in this paper showcases
the second PATHS prototype that has been developed based
on the experience of building, using, and evaluating the ﬁrst
prototype. While the prototype uses cultural heritage data,
it can be applied to data-sets from other domains as well.

2. THE PATHS SYSTEM

When a new user comes to the PATHS system, they are
oﬀered two main avenues for overviewing and exploring the
collection. One is a set of guided tours, called paths, that
have been curated both by experts and other users, and
represent a more focused version of the paths concept intro-
duced by [6]. These paths take the user on a trip through an
aspect of the collection, providing a ﬁrst introduction to the
kind of information available. The second avenue is through
the use of an automatically generated thesaurus that pro-
vides topic-based exploration support. Figure 1 shows the
textual visualisation that enables the user to explore and
drill down into the thesaurus. Tag-cloud and map-based vi-
sualisations are also provided to support users with diﬀerent
cognitive styles. The inset in ﬁgure 1 shows the map-based
visualisation, which creates a novel, two-dimensional seman-
tic map of the thesaurus that supports a visual exploration
of the collection.

As the user explores the collection they can collect indi-
vidual items into their workspace. This allows them to keep
track of what they have explored and of items that might
help them to fulﬁl their information needs. The items in the
workspace can be annotated and arranged to support the
analysis of what the user has found.

When the user has found a suﬃcient number of items
to fulﬁl their information need they can arrange the items
into a path structure to support the ﬁnal sense-making step
in the information seeking journey (ﬁg. 2). The path is
an ordered structure of items that supports branching and

1105Figure 1: Screenshot showing some of the exploration features provided by the PATHS system. The main
area shows the thesaurus for exploring the collection. The inset in the bottom-right corner shows a semantic
map that has been developed to enable a more visual exploration of the collection.

4. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The research leading to these results was supported by
the PATHS project (http://paths-project.eu) funded by
the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 270082.

5. REFERENCES
[1] M. Hearst. Clustering versus faceted categories for

information exploration. Communications of the ACM,
49(4):59–61, 2006.

[2] K. Hornbæk and M. Hertzum. The notion of overview
in information visualization. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 69(7-8):509 – 525, 2011.
[3] C. Kulthau. Inside the search process: information
seeking from the user’s perspective. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 42(5):361–271, 1991.

[4] G. Marchionini. Exploratory search: From ﬁnding to

understanding. Communications of the ACM,
49(4):41–46, 2006.

[5] T. Russell-Rose and T. Tate. Designing the search

experience: The information architecture of discovery.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2013.

[6] F. Shipman, C. Marshall, R. Furuta, D. Brenner, H.-w.

Hsieh, and V. Kumar. Creating educational guided
paths over the world-wide web. In Proceedings of
Ed-Telecom, volume 96, pages 326–331. Citeseer, 1996.

[7] A. Shiri, C. Revie, and G. Chowdhury.

Thesaurus-enhanced search interfaces. Journal of
information science, 28(2):111–122, 2002.

[8] A. Sutcliﬀe and M. Ennis. Towards a cognitive theory

of information retrieval. Interacting with Computers,
10:321–351, 1998.

[9] M. Wilson, K. B, S. MC, and S. B. From keyword

search to exploration: Designing future search
interfaces for the web. Foundations and Trends in Web
Science, 2(1):1–97, 2010.

Figure 2: Overview over an example path on the
topic of “Railways”, showing the ability to structure
the information by creating multiple branches.

user-annotation of each step in the path, creating the user’s
narrative through parts of the collection. Potential uses for
the paths are as a personal overview over a topic that can
evolve as the user further explores the collection, as a virtual
exhibition or story created by a collection curator, or as a
learning object to support teaching activities.

3. DEMO DESCRIPTION

The PATHS demo will provide a guided tour to the PATHS
system and demonstrate how a user can explore the col-
lection, collect items and then form these into the sense-
making path structure. Participants can then explore the
prototype system on their own, which will be provided at
http://www.paths-project.eu. The demo will provide ac-
cess to a sub-set of the data available in Europeana1, cov-
ering approximately 1.8 million items from the English and
Spanish collections.

1http://www.europeana.eu

1106