Match the News: a Firefox Extension for Real-Time News

Recommendation

Margarita Karkali
Athens University of

Economics and Business
karkalimar@aueb.gr

Dimitris Pontikis
Athens University of

Economics and Business
pontikhsd@aueb.gr

Michalis Vazirgiannis

Athens University of

Economics and Business,
LIX - Ecole Polytechnique,

Telecom Paris-Tech
mvazirg@aueb.gr

ABSTRACT
We present Match the News, a browser extension for real
time news recommendation. Our extension works on the
client side to recommend in real time recently published ar-
ticles that are relevant to the web page the user is currently
visiting. Match the News is fed from Google News RSS and
applies syntactic matching to ﬁnd the relevant articles. We
implement an innovative weighting function to perform the
keyword extraction task, BM 25H. With BM 25H we ex-
tract keywords not only relevant to currently browsed web
page, but also novel with respect to the user’s recent brows-
ing history. The novelty feature in keyword extraction task
results in meaningful news recommendations with regards
to the web page the users currently visits. Moreover the
extension oﬀers a salient visualization of the terms corre-
sponding to the users recent browsing history making thus
the extension a comprehensive tool for real time news rec-
ommendation and self assessment.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval ]: Information
ﬁltering
Keywords
news recommendation, browser extension, novelty detection
1.

PLUG-IN DESCRIPTION

News recommendation has been a very active area in re-
search and industry in the last several years. This is due to
the vast user community and the availability of many news
streams. Matching users interests and recommending rele-
vant news is a task that is highly challenging but also quite
interesting for the industry as it is many times interleaved
with advertising processes. In any case credible news recom-
mendations increase the chances for retaining the user on a
speciﬁc web page and thus match marketing or other targets.
The news recommendation process is based on a user proﬁle
that is build based on explicit or implicit data. We simulate

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

Figure 1: Match the News in action.

users currents interest with the page she is currently visit-
ing and we recommend news relevant to this pages rather
than to the generic user proﬁle. This is an innovative news
recommendation form to the best of our knowledge. Based
on this intuition we designed and built a browser plug-in
named ”Match the News”.

Match the News browser extension targets to the average
web user and aims at recommending in real time news arti-
cles related to the content currently visited. As access to the
user’s content raises privacy concerns, such a recommenda-
tion system should process this information locally or explic-
itly ask permission from the user to disclose this potentially
sensitive information. Match the News operates exclusively
on the client side and thus respects the user privacy.

The items to recommend are the news articles from the
RSS feeds provided by the Google News aggregator. In order
to match the web page currently displayed to these articles,
keyword extraction on the current web page takes place. The
weighting function used for this process is the novel BM 25H
function introduced in [1]. BM 25H takes into account a
shifting window of the user’s browsing history to construct
an dynamic corpus which evolves through time. Using this
corpus, we extract keywords that are both relevant to the
web page and novel with respect to the previously displayed
content. Finally, Match the News compares each article to
the set of the extracted keywords, and displays the ones
having the higher similarity (see ﬁgure 1).

Match the News has been developed as a Firefox extension
and it is available for download from Firefox add-on gallery1.

1https://addons.mozilla.org/addon/match-the-news/

11172. ARCHITECTURE AND COMPONENTS
News Articles Collection and Dynamic Corpus.
Implementing a corpus dependent weighting function on a
system that works locally on the client’s device brings up
the problem of corpus storage. Document collections usu-
ally used for information retrieval tasks, including the com-
puting of global weights such as IDF , present a cardinality
ranging in millions, a size prohibitive for a locally operat-
ing browser plug-in. Match the News develops an evolving
corpus consisting of the last N pages the user visits, upon
its installation. To eﬀectively maintain such a collection,
the plug-in database does not include the actual web doc-
uments but only the statistical information for the last N
documents, necessary in the BM 25H formula, i.e. for each
term present in the last N web pages, the tDF value and
the time stamp of its last occurrence.

As Match the News works on the client side, the items
available for recommendation must be locally accessible to
select those matching the current user context. This is
achieved by periodically collecting the news articles available
through Google News RSS feed. Each news unit consists of
the article title, a small description (snippet), the URL for
the article and the publication date.

Keyword Extraction. Real time performance, is a cru-
cial feature for a system that recommends news related to
the content currently displayed to the user. This require-
ment, primarily raises from users intolerance to delay, espe-
cially for actions not directly related to their current intent.
In addition, if the response time of the recommendation sys-
tem is high, the probability of the user to leave the web
page increases, and thus the recommendation process may
not conclude. The recommendation process involves match-
ing the web page vector to the respective of the news items.
Comparing the full term vector of a web page in order to
ﬁnd the best matching articles can be expensive for large
size web pages. To tackle this problem Match the News im-
plements a keyword extraction algorithm to select the top-k
terms from the web page.

Keyword extraction involves a term weighting function
suitable for distinguishing the terms in a web page that bet-
ter describe the concept presented. Match the News imple-
ments an innovative weighting function, we introduced in
[1], capitalizing on keyword novelty with regards to the key-
words distribution within the user’s history. This method
includes the maintenance of a pseudo-DF, tDF , which in-
volves both the document frequency of a term as well as
its distribution of occurrences over time and thus declines
as the corresponding term stops occurring in the browsing
history. Using the tDF to replace the regular document
frequency, we introduced BM 25H, a scoring function that
penalizes terms frequently occurring in the browsing history
of the user. These terms are often website speciﬁc stopwords
such as its domain name or other terms globally present in
websites, such as menu items (e.g. contact, home etc). More
details and experimental evaluation on the scoring function
can be found in [1].

The News Recommendation Process When an arti-
cle reaches the system, it is stored in the database using the
bag of words representation. The weighting scheme used for
the is the normalized T F . Having the term vector for each
article and the term vector of the current web page (resulting
for the keyword extraction process), Match the News uses
the cosine similarity measure to compute the similarity be-

Figure 2: Word Clouds from Match the News for
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flower.

tween each article having at least one term in common with
the web page. From the articles whose similarity to the web
page vector passes a certain similarity threshold the top-k
are displayed.

Recent History Visualization Alongside the news rec-
ommendation service, Match the News oﬀers a visualization
option, that presents an comprehensive overview of the re-
cent browsing activity and at the same time enables system
monitoring by the user herself. Using the popular word-
cloud representations, we introduce History Cloud, which
illustrates the most frequent terms in user’s recent brows-
ing history. For the construction of History Cloud terms
are weighted with tDF . Moreover, the current web page
is represented by two word clouds. The ﬁrst is a regular
word-cloud, where the terms in the website are weighted
using plain T F . For the second word-cloud, the terms il-
lustrated are those selected through the keyword extraction
process, weighted using BM 25H. Comparing these clouds
we can decide on the representativeness of the correspond-
ing weighting functions. An example of the aforementioned
word-clouds can be found in ﬁgure 2. There we can easily
conclude that the user was recently interested in web devel-
opment. In addition, comparing the two clouds about the
current web page it is obvious that using BM 25H instead
of plain T F leads to better quality of terms with regards to
their discriminative value.

Concluding, we presented a browser extension for real
time news recommendation based on the current content
the users views. The recommendation process capitalizes on
a novel feature extraction measure detecting novel terms in
the user browsing history. Moreover it respects user’s pri-
vacy - as the extension does not keep any centralized user
history or other data. The extension oﬀers a salient visual-
ization of the terms corresponding to the users recent brows-
ing history making thus the extension a comprehensive tool
for real time news recommendation and self assessment.
3. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

M. Karkali has been co-ﬁnanced by the EU (ESF) and
Greek national funds through the Operational Program ”Ed-
ucation and Lifelong Learning” of the NSRF - Heracleitus II.
4. REFERENCES

[1] M. Karkali, V. Plachouras, C. Stefanatos, and M. Vazirgiannis.

Keeping keywords fresh: a bm25 variation for personalized
keyword extraction. TempWeb ’12, pages 17–24. ACM, 2012.

1118