The Cluster Hypothesis in Information Retrieval

Oren Kurland

Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management

Technion — Israel Institute of Technology

Haifa 32000, Israel

kurland@ie.technion.ac.il

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Retrieval
Models

Keywords
cluster hypothesis

1. OVERVIEW

The cluster hypothesis states that “closely associated doc-
uments tend to be relevant to the same requests” [1]. This
is one of the most fundamental and inﬂuential hypotheses
in the ﬁeld of information retrieval and has given rise to a
huge body of work.

In this tutorial we will present the research topics that
have emerged based on the cluster hypothesis. Speciﬁc fo-
cus will be placed on cluster-based document retrieval, the
use of topic models for ad hoc IR, and the use of graph-
based methods that utilize inter-document similarities. Fur-
thermore, we will provide an in-depth survey of the suite
of retrieval methods and techniques that rely, either explic-
itly or implicitly, on the cluster hypothesis and which are
used for a variety of diﬀerent tasks; e.g., query expansion,
query-performance prediction, fusion and federated search,
search-results diversiﬁcation.

2. TUTORIAL OBJECTIVES

The primary objective of this tutorial is to present the
cluster hypothesis and the lines of research to which it has
given rise. To this end, much emphasis will be put on fun-
damental retrieval techniques and principles that are based
on the cluster hypothesis and which have been used for a
variety of IR tasks. The more speciﬁc goals of the tutorial
are to provide attendees with (i) the required background
to pursue research in topics that are based on the cluster
hypothesis; (ii) an overview of the diﬀerent tasks for which
the cluster hypothesis can be leveraged; and, (iii) fundamen-

tal knowledge of the retrieval “toolkit” that was developed
based on the cluster hypothesis.

3. TUTORIAL OUTLINE

• Introduction.

– The cluster hypothesis.
– A high level overview of the eﬀect of the cluster

hypothesis on the IR ﬁeld.

• Testing the cluster hypothesis.

• Cluster-based document retrieval.

– The dual role of document clusters in cluster-
based document retrieval (document selection vs.
document representation).

– Using clusters for document selection.

∗ The optimal cluster problem.

– Using clusters (or topic models) to “expand” doc-

ument representations.
– Cluster representation.
– Types of clusters (oﬄine vs. query-speciﬁc vs.

query-biased; hard vs. soft).

• Graph-based methods utilizing inter-document simi-

larities.

– Centrality-based methods.
– Score regularization.
– Cluster-based and passage-based graphs.

• Additional IR tasks for which inter-document similar-

ities are used.

– Using document clusters to visualize retrieved re-

sults; query expansion; cross-lingual retrieval; query-
performance prediction; fusion and federated search;
search-results diversiﬁcation.

• Open challenges.

• Summary.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

Acknowledgments We thank the reviewers for their com-
ments.

4. REFERENCES
[1] C. J. van Rijsbergen. Information Retrieval. Butterworths,

second edition, 1979.

1126