Scalability and Efﬁciency Challenges in

Commercial Web Search Engines

B. Barla Cambazoglu

Yahoo! Labs

Barcelona, Spain

barla@yahoo-inc.com

Ricardo Baeza-Yates

Yahoo! Labs

Barcelona, Spain

rbaeza@acm.org

ABSTRACT
Commercial web search engines rely on very large compute
infrastructures to be able to cope with the continuous growth
of the Web and user bases. Achieving scalability and ef-
ﬁciency in such large-scale search engines requires making
careful architectural design choices while devising algorith-
mic performance optimizations. Unfortunately, most details
about the internal functioning of commercial web search en-
gines remain undisclosed due to their ﬁnancial value and the
high level of competition in the search market. The main
objective of this tutorial is to provide an overview of the fun-
damental scalability and eﬃciency challenges in commercial
web search engines, bridging the existing gap between the
industry and academia.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage Systems]: Information Re-
trieval Systems

General Terms
Algorithms, Design, Performance

Keywords
Web search engines, crawling, indexing, query processing,
caching, eﬃciency, scalability.

1. DESCRIPTION

Commercial web search engines need to process thou-
sands of queries every second and provide responses to user
queries within a few hundred milliseconds. As a consequence
of these tight performance constraints, search engines con-
struct and maintain very large compute infrastructures for
crawling the Web, indexing discovered pages, and process-
ing user queries [3]. The scalability and eﬃciency of these
infrastructures require careful performance optimizations in
every major component of the search engine [2].

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

This tutorial aims to provide a fairly comprehensive
overview of the scalability and eﬃciency challenges in large-
scale web search engines [1]. In particular, the tutorial pro-
vides an in-depth architectural overview of a web search en-
gine, mainly focusing on the web crawling, indexing, query
processing, and caching components. The scalability and
eﬃciency issues encountered in the above-mentioned com-
ponents are presented at four diﬀerent granularities: at the
level of a single computer, a cluster of computers, a single
data center, and a multi-center search engine. The tuto-
rial also points at the open research problems and provides
recommendations to researchers who are new to the ﬁeld.

2. OBJECTIVES

The tutorial aims to achieve the following objectives:

1. To provide in-depth background on the basic architec-

tural components in a web search engine.

2. To present the fundamental scalability and eﬃciency
issues which have been often addressed in the informa-
tion retrieval literature.

3. To shed some light into the techniques used in large-
scale commercial search engines and bridge the gap
between the industry and academia.

4. To identify the open research problems in the context
of web search engine scalability and eﬃciency, promot-
ing further research on the topic.

3. REFERENCES
[1] B. B. Cambazoglu and R. Baeza-Yates. Scalability

challenges in web search engines. In M. Melucci,
R. Baeza-Yates, and W. B. Croft, editors, Advanced
Topics in Information Retrieval, volume 33 of The
Information Retrieval Series, pages 27–50. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.

[2] A. Chowdhury and G. Pass. Operational requirements
for scalable search systems. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, pages 435–442, 2003.

[3] J. Dean. Challenges in building large-scale information

retrieval systems: invited talk. In Proceedings of the
2nd ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining, page 1, 2009.

1124