Searching in the City of Knowledge: Challenges and

Recent Developments

Veli Bicer, Vanessa Lopez
IBM Research, Dublin, Ireland

{velibice,vanlopez}@ie.ibm.com

ABSTRACT
Today plenty of data is emerging from various city systems.
Beyond the classical Web resources, large amounts of data
are retrieved from sensors, devices, social networks, govern-
mental applications, or service networks. In such a diver-
sity of information, answering speciﬁc information needs of
city inhabitants requires holistic IR techniques, capable of
harnessing diﬀerent types of city data and turned it into
actionable insights to answer diﬀerent queries. This tuto-
rial will present deep insights, challenges, opportunities and
techniques to make heterogeneous city data searchable and
show how emerging IR techniques models can be employed
to retrieve relevant information for the citizens.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation

1.

INTRODUCTION

Majority of people reside in cities (estimated over 70%
of the world population by 2050) - a situation posing sev-
eral challenges for municipalities, governments, citizens and
businesses. In an urbanizing world, cities comprise of dif-
ferent systems ranging from transport, water, and electric-
ity data management infrastructures to social, communica-
tion and service networks. The data emerging from these
systems is a precious resource to make cities more intelli-
gent, innovative and integrated beyond the boundaries of
isolated applications. Today, beyond the classical Web re-
sources (e.g. documents) large amounts of data are retrieved
from sensors, mobile devices, social network messages, gov-
ernmental applications, or service networks. In such a di-
versity of information, the speciﬁc information needs of the
city inhabitants requires a holistic IR and data management
techniques, capable of harnessing diﬀerent types of city data
and to turn into actionable insights. In fact, existing local

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

search engines such as Google+ Local1, Yahoo! Local2, or
ask.com’s AskCity3 already take an initial step to answer
some vital information needs. However, when it comes to
answering more complex user information needs, the exist-
ing local search engines have certain limitations in terms of
understanding these complex needs and also capturing the
required information from diﬀerent city data sources in re-
sponse to them.

There exists a number of unique challenges and oppor-
tunities for the IR community to make such a type of het-
erogeneous city data searchable. To achieve that, there is
a need ﬁrst to acquire, integrate, manage, and analyze rele-
vant city data across diﬀerent sources to dynamically answer
diﬀerent queries [2]. This is unlike the classical local search
engines which rely on a limited number of sources (e.g. Web
documents) or a curated proprietary knowledge base to un-
ambiguously acquire the city-related information. In fact,
the source of information in a city setting may range from
the city databases4 or services to the sensor or social media
streams, each of those providing diﬀerent sort of informa-
tion with varying timeliness and relevance. It is a unique
data-centric application domain for many foundational IR
techniques to be applied on.

This tutorial will present the deep insights, novel chal-
lenges, opportunities and techniques to make city data query-
able. We will present what “searching the city data” actually
means beyond the current approaches to answer the possi-
ble information needs of the city inhabitants and how they
diﬀer from searching the Web or enterprise data. We will
also present how common IR techniques and emerging mod-
els [1, 3] can be employed and adapted to retrieve the rel-
evant information for the users, and how the relevancy can
be improved by considering diﬀerent city-speciﬁc aspects in
diﬀerent stages of search process.

2. REFERENCES
[1] V. Bicer, T. Tran, and R. Nedkov. Ranking support for

keyword search on structured data using relevance
models. In CIKM, pages 1669–1678, 2011.

[2] V. Lopez, S. Kotoulas, M. L. Sbodio, M. Stephenson,

A. Gkoulalas-Divanis, and P. M. Aonghusa. Queriocity:
A linked data platform for urban information
management. In ISWC, pages 148–163, 2012.

[3] M. L. S. Vanessa Lopez, Spyros Kotoulas and R. Lloyd.

Guided exploration and integration of urban data. In
Hypertext. ACM, 2013.

1https://plus.google.com/local
2http://local.yahoo.com/
3http://city.ask.com/
4http://www.dublinked.ie/

1123