SIGIR 2013 Workshop on Time Aware Information Access

(#TAIA2013)

Fernando Diaz

fdiaz@microsoft.com

Kira Radinsky

kira@salespredict.com

Susan Dumais

sdumais@microsoft.com
Maarten de Rijke
derijke@uva.nl

Miles Efron

mefron@illinois.edu

Milad Shokouhi

milads@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
Web content increasingly reﬂects the current state of the
physical and social world, manifested both in traditional
news media sources along with user-generated publishing
sites such as Twitter, Foursquare, and Facebook. At the
same time, web searching increasingly reﬂects problems grounded
in the real world. As a result of this blending of the web with
the real world, we observe that the web, both in its composi-
tion and use, has incorporated many of the dynamics of the
real world. Few of the problems associated with searching
dynamic collections are well understood, such as deﬁning
time-sensitive relevance, understanding user query behav-
ior over time and understanding why certain web content
changes.

We believe that, just as static collections often beneﬁt
from modeling topics, dynamic collections will likely beneﬁt
from temporal modeling of events and time-sensitive user
interests and intents, which were rarely addressed in the lit-
erature. There have been preliminary eﬀorts in the research
and industrial communities to address algorithms, architec-
tures, evaluation methodologies and metrics.

We aim to bring together practitioners and researchers to
discuss their recent breakthroughs and the challenges with
addressing time-aware information access, both from the al-
gorithmic and the architectural perspectives.

This workshop is a successor to the successful SIGIR 2012

Workshop on Time Aware Information Access (#TAIA2012).1
Where the 2012 edition was the ﬁrst to bring together a
broad set of academic and industrial researchers around the
topic of time-aware information access, the speciﬁc focus of
this workshop is on the many time-aware benchmarking ac-
tivities that are ongoing in 2013.

1. SCOPE

We solicited submissions related to all aspects of time-
sensitive information access. TAIA 2013 has a special focus

1http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/people/milads/
taia2012.aspx

on evaluation and on the collaborative benchmarking activ-
ities that are happening this year:

• Temporal summarization (or works in progress for the

TREC 2013 task).

• Real-time search (or works in progress for the TREC
2013 task), including, real-time trends in social cir-
cles, real time events vs. real time queries, aggregated
search answers for real-time searches, and other related
issues.

• Dynamic information extraction and updating (or works
in progress for TREC 2013 Knowledge Base Accelera-
tion (KBA) and Temporal Summarization tracks).

Research questions include: How can these tasks be ap-
proached? Are they measuring the right thing? What do
they teach us? What is missing?

In addition, TAIA 2013 solicited contributions on the fol-
lowing issues that complement today’s benchmarking activ-
ities and that may inform future versions of these activities:
• Publicly available dynamic collections (e.g. Wikipedia

edits, Wikipedia page requests, Twitter and news streams).

• Evaluation methodologies for time-sensitive tasks.
• Timeline creations and summarizations
• Temporal natural language processing tasks and tech-

niques

• Time-sensitive ranking, including, eﬀective ranking for
time-sensitive queries, optimizing for both freshness
and relevance, evaluating the results for time sensitive
queries, etc.

• Temporal changes in document contents.
• Understanding Web dynamics, including trends and

other temporal analysis on web and social graphs.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1137