Internet Advertising: Theory and Practice

Bin Gao

Jun Yan

Microsoft Research Asia

13F, Bldg 2, No. 5, Danling St
Beijing, 100080, P. R. China
bingao@microsoft.com

Microsoft Research Asia

13F, Bldg 2, No. 5, Danling St
Beijing, 100080, P. R. China
junyan@microsoft.com

Dou Shen
Baidu Inc.

Beijing, 100085, P. R. China

doushen@live.com

Tie-Yan Liu

Microsoft Research Asia

13F, Bldg 2, No. 5, Danling St
Beijing, 100080, P. R. China

tyliu@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
Internet advertising, a form of advertising that utilizes the
Internet to deliver marketing messages and attract customers,
has seen exponential growth since its inception around twenty
years ago; it has been pivotal to the success of the World
Wide Web. The dramatic growth of internet advertising
poses great challenges to information retrieval, machine learn-
ing, data mining and game theory, and it calls for novel tech-
nologies to be developed. The main purpose of this work-
shop is to bring together researchers and practitioners in
the area of Internet Advertising and enable them to share
their latest research results, to express their opinions, and
to discuss future directions.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.5 [Information Systems]: Information Storage and
Retrieval - On-line Information Services

billions of keywords, tens of millions of ads, billions of users,
millions of advertisers where events such as clicks and ac-
tions can be extremely rare. For such a complex problem,
conventional technologies and evaluation methodologies are
not suﬃcient. With the dramatically developing Internet
advertising industry, it is the right time to organize a work-
shop to share and discuss the new thoughts, algorithms, and
theories in this area.

Internet advertising is one of the most important moneti-
zation engines of the Internet. It is highly associated with
many IR applications such as web portals, search engines,
social networks, e-commerce, mobile networks and apps, etc.
Researchers in information retrieval, machine learning, data
mining, and game theory are developing creative ideas to
advance the technologies in this area.

2. TOPICS AND THEMES

Possible topics and themes include but not limited to:

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation, Theory

Keywords
Computational advertising, information retrieval, game the-
ory.

1. MOTIVATION

Internet advertising is a complex problem.

It contains
multiple parties including advertisers, users, publishers, ad
agencies, and ad platforms such as ad exchanges. It is highly
dynamic in terms of the rapid change of user information
needs, non-stationary bids of advertisers, and the frequent
modiﬁcations of ads campaigns. It is very large scale, with

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

1. Machine learning for internet advertising: (i)
Learning to predict ad click-through rate, (ii) Learn-
ing to rank for ads display, (iii) Learning to predict
advertiser behaviors, (iv) Learning to compute ad rel-
evance.

2. Data mining for internet advertising: (i) Mining
online retailer logs for recommender systems, (ii) Min-
ing search ads logs for improving ad relevance, click-
through rate prediction, and evaluation, (iii) Mining
user behavior logs for behavioral targeting, (iv) Min-
ing Web knowledge for online advertising.

3. Game theory for internet advertising: (i) Mech-
anism design for sponsored search, display ads, so-
cial network advertising, etc., (ii) Advertiser behavior
modeling and user behavior modeling.

4. Other Topics in Advertising and Internet Eco-
nomics: (i) Ad exchanges and real-time bidding, (ii)
Fraud detection in ad clicks, (iii) Search engine mar-
keting (SEM), (iv) Advertising on social networks, mo-
biles, games, etc., (v) Privacy preserving, (vi) Ad per-
sonalization, (vii) Context aware ad recommendation,
(viii) Case studies for Internet advertising.

1135