Multimedia Recommendation: Technology and Techniques

Jialie Shen† Meng Wang‡ Shuicheng Yan(cid:63) Peng Cui∗

† Singapore Management University, Singapore

jlshen@smu.edu.sg

‡ Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China

eric.mengwang@gmail.com

(cid:63) National University of Singapore, Singapore

eleyans@nus.edu.sg

∗ Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information Search
and Retrieval

General Terms
Algorithms, Performance, Theory

Keywords
Multimedia, Recommendation

INTRODUCTION

1.
In recent years, we have witnessed a rapid growth in the avail-
ability of digital multimedia on various application platforms and
domains. Consequently, the problem of information overload has
become more and more serious. In order to tackle the challenge,
various multimedia recommendation technologies have been de-
veloped by different research communities (e.g., multimedia sys-
tems, information retrieval, machine learning and computer ver-
sion). Meanwhile, many commercial web systems (e.g., Flick,
YouTube, and Last.fm) have successfully applied recommendation
techniques to provide users personalized content and services in a
convenient and ﬂexible way.

When looking back, the information retrieval (IR) community
has a long history of studying and contributing recommender sys-
tem design and related issues. It has been proven that the recom-
mender systems can effectively assist users in handling information
overload and provide high-quality personalization. While several
courses were dedicated to multimedia retrieval in the recent decade,
to the best of our knowledge, the tutorial is the ﬁrst one speciﬁcally
focusing on multimedia recommender systems and their applica-
tions on various domains and media contents. We plan to summa-
rize the research along this direction and provide an impetus for
further research on this important topic.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage, and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

2. TUTORIAL OVERVIEW

This tutorial is devoted to scholars and industry practitioners
working on information retrieval, multimedia information manage-
ment, machine learning and data mining applications as well as
those people that would like to get aware of the research ﬁeld of
multimedia recommendation and their major real applications. The
tutorial consists of ﬁve core sections, and it is structured as follows,
• Introduction and Overview: The tutorial will start with a va-
riety of vivid examples demonstrating why effective recom-
mendation is so important for Web scale multimedia search
and sharing. Then, we discuss a few important issues that
are most relevant to recommender system design and evalu-
ation. They include long tail, information overload and user
behavior.

• Image and Video Recommendation: We examine current com-
mercial systems and research prototypes, focusing on com-
paring the advantages and the disadvantages of the various
strategies and schemes.

• Go beyond Visual Data: Music Recommendation: The im-
portance of music recommendation is discussed ﬁrstly. Next,
a few fundamental topics (e.g., user modeling, major busi-
ness models, algorithm design, large scale system evaluation
and key applications) will be explored in detail.

• Personalization and Contextualization: The majority of ex-
isting multimedia recommendation systems focuses on rec-
ommending the most relevant items to individual users and
generally ignores any contextual information. We discuss
what kind of role contextual information can play in building
personalized multimedia recommendation. We also examine
the approach to estimate individual preference and analyze
contextual information.

• Summarization and Conclusion: Multimedia recommenda-
tion is a very exciting research area. After reviewing recent
technical developments, this section aims to explore a set of
open issues for the future study and potential solutions.

1131