Indexing and Querying Overlapping Structures

Faegheh Hasibi

Norwegian University of Science and Technology

Trondheim, Norway

faeghehh@idi.ntnu.no

ABSTRACT
Structural information retrieval is mostly based on hierar-
chy. However, in real life information is not purely hier-
archical and structural elements may overlap each other.
The most common example is a document with two distinct
structural views, where the logical view is section/ sub-
section/ paragraph and the physical view is page/ line.
Each single structural view of this document is a hierarchy
and the components are either disjoint or nested inside each
other. The overlapping issue arises when one structural el-
ement cannot be neatly nested into others. For instance,
when a paragraph starts in one page and terminates in the
next page. Similar situations can appear in videos and other
multimedia contents, where temporal or spatial constituents
of a media ﬁle may overlap each other.

Querying over overlapping structures is one of the chal-
lenges of large scale search engines. For instance, FSIS
(FAST Search for Internet Sites) [1] is a Microsoft search
platform, which encounters overlaps while analysing con-
tent of textual data. FSIS uses a pipeline process to extract
structure and semantic information of documents. The pipe-
line contains several components, where each component
writes annotations to the input data. These annotations
consist of structural elements and some of them may over-
lap each other. Handling overlapping structures in search
engines will add a novel capability of searching, where users
can ask queries such as “Find all the words that overlap two
lines” or “Find the music played during Intro scene of Avatar
movie”. There are also other use cases, where the user of the
search engine is not a person, but is a speciﬁc program with
complex, non-traditional information retrieval needs.

This research attempts to index overlapping structures
and provide eﬃcient query processing for large-scale search
engines. The current research on overlapping structures re-
volves around encoding and modelling data, while indexing
and query processing methods need investigations. More-
over, due to intrinsic complexity of overlaps, XML indexing
and query processing techniques cannot be used for overlap-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07.

ping structures. Hence, my research on overlapping struc-
tures comprises three main parts: (1) an indexing method
that supports both hierarchies and overlaps; (2) a query pro-
cessing method based on the indexing technique and (3) a
query language that is close to natural language and sup-
ports both full text and structural queries.

Our approach for indexing overlaps is to adapt the Pre-
Post [3] XML indexing method to overlapping structures.
This method labels each node with its start and end posi-
tions and requires modest storage space. However, PrePost
indexing cannot be used for overlapping nodes. To overcome
this issue, we need to deﬁne a data model for overlapping
structures. Since hierarchies are not suﬃcient to describe
overlapping components, several data structures have been
introduced by scholars. One of the most interesting data
models is GODDAG [2]. GODDAG is a tree-like graph,
where nodes can have multiple parentage. This model can
support overlaps as well as simple inheritance. Our pro-
posed data model for indexing overlaps is such a tree-like
structure, where we can deﬁne overlapping, parent-child and
ancestor-descendant relationships.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content
Analysis and Indexing

Keywords
Overlapping Structures, Indexing, Query Processing, Semi-
structured Data

1. REFERENCES
[1] M. Bennett, J. Fried, M. Kehoe, and

N. Voskresenskaya. Professional Microsoft Search:
FAST Search, SharePoint Search, and Search Server.
Wrox, 2010.

[2] C. Sperberg-McQueen and C. Huitfeldt. Goddag: A

data structure for overlapping hierarchies. In P. King
and E. Munson, editors, Digital Documents: Systems
and Principles, volume 2023 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 606–630. Springer Berlin-
Heidelberg, 2004.

[3] C. Zhang, J. Naughton, D. DeWitt, Q. Luo, and

G. Lohman. On supporting containment queries in
relational database management systems. In
Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGMOD international
conference on Management of data, SIGMOD ’01,
pages 425–436, New York, NY, USA, 2001. ACM.

1144