A Location-Based News Article Recommendation

with Explicit Localized Semantic Analysis

Jeong-Woo Son

A-Yeong Kim

Seong-Bae Park

School of Computer Science and Engineering

Kyungpook National University

Daegu, Korea

[ jwson, aykim, sbpark ]@sejong.knu.ac.kr

ABSTRACT
The interest of users in handheld devices is strongly related
to their location. Therefore, the user location is important,
as a user context, for news article recommendation in a mo-
bile environment. This paper proposes a novel news article
recommendation that reﬂects the geographical context of
the user. For this purpose, we propose the Explicit Local-
ized Semantic Analysis (ELSA), an ESA-based topical rep-
resentation of documents. Every location has its own geo-
graphical topics, which can be captured from the geo-tagged
documents related to the location. Thus, not only news arti-
cles but locations are also represented as topic vectors. The
main advantage of ELSA is that it stresses only the topics
that are relevant to a given location, whereas all topics are
equally important in ESA. As a result, geographical topics
have diﬀerent importance according to the user location in
ELSA, even if they come from the same article. Another
advantage of ELSA is that it allows a simple comparison of
the user location and news articles, because it projects both
locations and articles onto an identical space composed of
Wikipedia topics. In the evaluation of ELSA with the New
York Times corpus, it outperformed two simple baselines of
Bag-Of-Words and LDA as well as two ESA-based methods.
Rt10 of ELSA was improved up to 46.25% over other meth-
ods, and its NDCG@k was always higher than those of the
others regardless of k.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval—Information ﬁltering

General Terms
Algorithm, Experimentation, Performance

Keywords
Localized recommender system; Explicit localized semantic
analysis; Geographical context; Local topic distribution

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Content-based news article recommendation aims to of-
fer news articles to a reader based on his/her interests. To
reﬂect the interests of a speciﬁc reader into article recom-
mendation, the interests are predicted from the user proﬁle
that is a collection of articles he/she has read in the past or
explicit information about the reader such as age and gen-
der. This kind of user proﬁle is static or at least almost
static. The proﬁle remains same regardless of the user lo-
cation, even if a large number of users of handheld devices
(i.e. smart phone or tablet PC) access online news providers
anywhere, and their interests depend on their location.

The fact that the interests of a user are strongly related to
their location, implies that his/her geographical context is
important for localized news article recommendation. For
instance, assume that a user is reading an article “After
Delays, Wireless Web Comes to Parks” of The New York
Times. This article delivers news about establishing wireless
networks at the prominent parks in New York city. There-
fore, it has two major topics, a new facility of public parks
and a company that won a contract for the wireless net-
work service. The people who are strolling at a public park
will focus on the former, while those working at Wall Street
would prefer the latter.

The key of news article recommendation is obviously a
representation of the articles. Word frequencies or topics are
the most widely used representation of articles [11, 18], but
recently, topic representation is preferred because a topic is
a good proxy for article contents [23]. For instance, Wang
and Blei proposed a collaborative topic model using Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to recommend scientiﬁc articles
[2]. Egozi et. al [5] projected articles onto a topic space con-
structed with Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) [7]. In ESA,
each Wikipedia concept is regarded as a possible topic, and
an article is represented as a topic vector with Wikipedia
concepts. Because Wikipedia has a large volume of con-
cepts, articles can be expressed eﬃciently and accurately.
On the other hand, such topic representations of articles are
geo-neutral. Therefore, a topic model that reﬂects the ge-
ographical context of a user is needed to localize an article
recommendation.

When the location at which a user is standing is the only
information available for the user proﬁle, the geographical
context of a user is equivalent to the geographical context of
his/her location. The geographical context of a location can
also be expressed as a topic vector, because most locations
have their own geographical topics that are deﬁned as spa-
tially coherent meaningful themes [25]. Most topic models

293proposed for extracting geographical topics from a location
identify topics actually from a set of geo-tagged documents
associated with the location [13]. Nevertheless, they have a
problem in that the geo-tagged documents include not only
the topics that are related directly to the location but also
some other topics that have no relationship with the loca-
tion.

This paper proposes a novel method for the topical repre-
sentation of documents, Explicit Localized Semantic Analy-
sis (ELSA). ELSA basically represents news articles as topic
vectors considering the geographical context of a location.
It inherits all the advantages of ESA as an extension of ESA,
but overcomes the drawback in that ESA is geo-neural. That
is, the topic vectors of the articles in ELSA are biased to
the geographical context of the location. For this purpose,
ELSA estimates the distribution of local topics for a given
user location. All topics for a location are found from the
geo-tagged documents of the location, but they are gener-
ally dependent on one another. For instance, the topics ‘FC
Barcelona’ and ‘Lionel Messi’ are somehow dependent from
each other, as they are related to Camp Nou, a football sta-
dium in Barcelona. To express the topic dependency, the
link information within Wikipedia concepts is adopted. All
Wikipedia concepts, which are related to the location, are
expressed as a graph with their link information. The hub
nodes of this topic dependency graph are the actual local
topics associated with the location.

Another advantage of ELSA is that it can be used to rep-
resent not only articles but also locations. This is because
the user location is also expressed with the topics from a set
of geo-tagged documents retrieved with that location. That
is, the articles and locations are all represented as vectors in
identical topic space. This leads to a simple comparison of
articles and locations, and eﬃcient recommendation of the
articles that are relevant to the user location.

A series of experiments were carried out to verify the rec-
ommendation performance of ELSA. In the experiments, the
articles were recommended for ﬁfteen locations in three dis-
tinguished categories: Airport, Baseball stadium, and Na-
tional park. The New York Times corpus was used as the
recommendation candidates, and the performance of ELSA
was compared with four other methods: Bag-of-Words, La-
tent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [2], Explicit Semantic Anal-
ysis (ESA) [7], and Probabilistic Explicit Semantic Analysis
(PESA) [21]. According to the experimental results, ELSA
outperformed the others in both Rt10 (Rating of Top 10)
[15] and NDCG@k. These results highlight the eﬀectiveness
of ELSA in the localized article recommendation.

2. RELATED WORK
2.1 Localized Recommendation

The popularity of handheld devices with a GPS makes the
user location available for various kinds of recommendations
[12, 17, 19]. Most previous studies on localized recommen-
dation have focused on the physical attributes of locations.
Dao et al. proposed a context-aware collaborative ﬁltering
for location-based advertising [4]. In their study, the item
scores for a speciﬁc user are determined by considering user’s
location. That is, the user-item matrix of this method is ex-
panded with the user locations. Thus, the user similarity
can be obtained using the items shared by other users at
the same location.

Zheng et al. proposed the user-centered collaborative lo-
cation and activity ﬁltering (UCLAF) to recommend tourism
spots and activities [27].
In UCLAF, the similar users of
a speciﬁc user are obtained based on their GPS trajecto-
ries and activities at tourism spots. UCLAF recommends
tourism spots for the user by analyzing similar users. CityVoy-
ager system proposed by Takeuchi and Sugimoto [22] uses
the shops previously visited by a user to recommend new
shops for him/her. Ye et al. proposed Geo-Measured Friend-
based Collaborative Filtering (GM-FCF) to recommend places
such as stores, movie theaters, etc [24]. The recommenda-
tion by GM-FCF is made using the places visited by his/her
friends in the social network. GM-FCF ranks the places by
their physical distance from his/her location. Yu and Chang
suggested a tour planning system [26]. This system also rec-
ommends sightseeing spots, hotels, and restaurants based on
user’s location.

As shown in these studies, the user’s location helps rec-
ommendation systems improve their performance. This is
because it reveals valuable information of the user. This was
recently taken into account for news recommendation. Ge-
oFeed is a location-aware news feed system [1]. This system
provides its users with the news that are spatially related
with the users. The spatial relationship between the user
and a news in GeoFeed is determined using the distances
from his/her to the locations tagged in the news. Mokbel et
al. employed user locations to recommend local news [14].
In their study, they considered the distance between the
user and location in which the news article was published.
Although these studies proved the feasibility of their idea
by implementing practical localized recommender systems,
only the physical attributes of the user location was consid-
ered but its latent attributes are ignored. To the best of our
knowledge, no study has used the latent attributes of the
user locations in news article recommendation.

2.2 Geographical Topic Model

A location is described physically by its longitude and
latitude. This is because it is diﬃcult to transform a lo-
cation into other forms but the coordinate of the longitude
and latitude, even though most locations have their own ge-
ographical context and the context can be expressed with
topics at these locations. For instance, the topics ‘shopping’
at a department store and ‘trip’ at a sightseeing spot de-
scribe their locations well. One of the eﬀorts to extract the
geographical topics of a location is the geographical topic
model. Therefore, range of geographical topic models have
been proposed [20, 28].

The main issue in geographical topics is how to associate
topics with locations. Eisenstein et al. proposed a gener-
ative model to determine the topics of a set of geo-tagged
documents and the regions corresponding to the topics si-
multaneously [6].
In order to determine them simultane-
ously, they assumed that a document is generated from two
latent variables of geographical topics and regions. Yin et
al. proposed Latent Geographical Topic Analysis (LGTA)
[25] to solve the same problem. The contribution of LGTA
is that it allows geographical topics to be associated with
multiple regions. Hong et al. proposed a generative model
to discover geographical topics in the tweet stream [9]. They
made a similar assumption using the above-mentioned meth-
ods, but the idiosyncracy of their method comes from the
fact that the method attempts to reﬂect the preferences of

294twitter users and the dependency between regions and top-
ics.

These geographical topic models were applied successfully
to geographical topic discovery. On the other hand, it is
diﬃcult to apply them to news article recommendation. In
order to recommend articles for a speciﬁc location, all the
topics at the location should be identiﬁed ﬁrst. However,
the topic models for topic discovery try to ﬁnd major topics
for the location. As a result, some topics are ignored, even if
they deliver some information for the location. Thus, a topic
model that utilizes all topics of a given location is needed.

One candidate to represent a location with all its top-
ics is Probabilistic Explicit Semantic Analysis (PESA) [21].
PESA is a probabilistic topic model based on Explicit Se-
mantic Analysis (ESA) [7], and is designed to compare lo-
cations with their topics. For this, it maps locations onto
a topic space spanned by Wikipedia concepts. Because all
Wikipedia concepts are employed in representing locations,
there are no missing topics associated with a location in
PESA.

PESA aims to compare locations, and its performance in
location comparison is high. However, it has a critical prob-
lem when being applied to localized article recommendation.
PESA computes the topic prior distribution to reﬂect the de-
pendency among topics. This prior distribution forces the lo-
cations in the same geographical category to be similar loca-
tions. It is global in that it comes from the dependency rela-
tions of all possible topics. Nevertheless, the topics relevant
only to a speciﬁc location are more inﬂuential than those ob-
served at almost all locations in the localized recommenda-
tion. For instance, assume two baseball stadiums, Rangers
Ballpark and Angel Stadium. They share many topics re-
garding baseball games. Hence, PESA considers them to be
similar locations. However, they should be treated diﬀer-
ently in localized article recommendation because they are
physically far and can have diﬀerent geographically-aﬀected
topics. That is, Rangers Ballpark could have topics about
Texas, whereas Angel Stadium could have topics about Los
Angeles or California.

3. LOCALIZED NEWS ARTICLE RECOM-

MENDATION

Assume that a user is speciﬁed only by his/her location
l = {longitude, latitude} ∈ R2. The localized news ar-
ticle recommendation then ranks a set of articles, A =
{a1, a2, . . . , an} so that the order between ranks a1 (cid:3) a2 (cid:3)
. . . (cid:3) an satisﬁes the geographical preference of the user at
l. The preference relation is determined by a score function
f (a, l) that always meets f (ai, l) > f (aj , l) if ai (cid:3) aj . That
is, the top k (k ≤ n) articles from A scored by this function
are suggested as appropriate news articles according to the
location l.

The score function f (a, l) measures the appropriateness of
each a to l. If both a and l are represented as vectors in the
same topic space, it can be replaced by a similarity function
[3]. That is, the score function f (a, l) can be deﬁned as

f (a, l) =

Φ(a) · Φ(l)
|Φ(a)| · |Φ(l)| ,

(1)

where Φ is a mapping function of news articles and locations
into a topic space.

Location l = {long, lat}

Geo-tagged
Documents

Dl

ELSA

Wikipedia

Document
Probability
Estimation

Document

Prob.

Topic Candidates

Link Information

Localized
Topic Dist.
Estimation

Localized

Topic Dist.

Localized

Topic Dist.

Article a

Article

Probability
Estimation

Document

Prob.

Location

Representation

Φ(l)

Article

Representation

Φ(a)

Comparison by

f (a, l)

Score (cid:80)(cid:71) a for l

Figure 1: Overall process of the localized article rec-
ommendation.

Figure 1 depicts the overall process of measuring how ap-
propriate a news article a is to a speciﬁc location l by Ex-
plicit Localized Semantic Analysis (ELSA). When l, the lo-
cation of a user is given, Dl, a set of documents for l, is
crawled from geo-tagged documents such as Twitter, Face-
book, and Flickr tags. Each document d in Dl is represented
as a topic vector of which dimension is the number of con-
cepts in Wikipedia as done in ESA. Then, the location l is
represented as a product of all d’s in Dl. The concepts with
non-zero values in this product vector are the possible topics
for l, even though some non-relevant topic are also included
at this step.

We assume that the topic would be dependent on one an-
other if they are actually related to l. In order to reﬂect this
dependency into the recommendation, a dependency graph
of the topics is constructed using the link information in
Wikipedia, and the local topic distribution is estimated from
this graph using PageRank [16]. This local topic distribution
explains which topics are actually important with respect to
l when the topics are related to each other. Therefore, it is
used as a weight vector for the product vector of Dl. Then,
the ﬁnal mapping Φ(l) of a location l into the Wikipedia
topic space is the multiplication of the product vector and
the local topic distribution.

News articles are also projected onto the Wikipedia topic
space in the same way. A news article a is ﬁrst expressed as
a topic vector as ESA does. Then, the ﬁnal mapping Φ(a)
of a is a multiplication of the topic vector of a and the local
topic distribution. Note that even the same article would
be represented diﬀerently according to the location, because
every diﬀerent location has a diﬀerent local topic distribu-

295(cid:3)

(cid:4)

ELSA represents a location l as

p(Dl, t1, l|θl, θt1 ), . . . , p(Dl, t|T|, l|θl, θt|T | )

Φ(l) =
(3)
where p(Dl, ti, l|θl, θti ) is the probability of the i-th topic.
Since l is independent of θl and θt, p(Dl, ti, l|θl, θt) becomes
p(Dl, ti|l, θl, θti )· p(l). Note that only l is related directly to
t in Figure 2. Therefore,

,

p(Dl, ti, l|θl, θti ) = p(Dl, ti|l, θl, θti ) · p(l)
(cid:5)

= p(Dl|ti, θti ) · p(ti|l, θl) · p(l)
= p(ti|l, θl) · p(l) ·
(cid:5)

d∈Dl

p(d|ti, θti ).

If p(l) is assumed to be uniform for all locations,
p(d|ti, θti ).

p(Dl, ti, l|θl, θti ) ∝ p(ti|l, θl) ·

d∈Dl

Then, for the scalability,
(cid:2)
p(Dl, ti, l|θl, θti ) ∝ log(p(Dl, ti, l|θl, θti ))

∝ log p(ti|l, θl) +

log p(d|ti, θti ).
Therefore, p(d|ti, θti ) and p(ti|l, θl) should be estimated for
each topic ti.
When we assume all words are independent, log p(d|ti, θti )

d∈Dl

can be expressed as

log p(d|ti, θti ) =

log p(w|ti, θti ).

(cid:2)

w∈d

Because Wikipedia concepts are adopted as topics, each
topic has its own Wikipedia article. p(w|ti, θti ) then mea-
sures how w is possibly generated from ci, which is the
Wikipedia article for ti. Thus, after add-one smoothing,
p(w|ti, θti ) is

θl

t

l

θt

w

|T|

|d|

Figure 2: Graphical representation of ELSA.

tion. At last, the appropriateness of a to l is determined by
f (a, l).

4. EXPLICIT LOCALIZED SEMANTIC

ANALYSIS

4.1 Location Representation

Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) [7] is a topical represen-
tation of unrestricted natural language documents. When a
set of geo-tagged documents Dl for a location l is given, it
maps, for the representation of l, Dl onto a topic space which
is explicitly deﬁned with Wikipedia concepts. The dimen-
sionality of the topic space is equivalent to the number of
Wikipedia concepts. Let T be a set of Wikipedia concepts.
Then, Dl is expressed as a topic vector

Dl = (cid:5)φ1(Dl), φ2(Dl), . . . , φ|T|(Dl)(cid:6).
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Here, φi(Dl) is the weight of the i-th topic for Dl and is
given as

tf idf (w, d, Dl) · tf idf (w, ci, T )),

φi(Dl) =

d∈Dl

w∈d

where ci is an article of a Wikipedia concept ti ∈ T , and
tf idf (w, d, Dl) = tf (w, d) · idf (w, Dl). Here, tf (w, d) is the
term frequency of w in d and idf (w, Dl) is the inverse doc-
ument frequency of w in Dl. That is, the location is repre-
sented as a topic vector through the geo-tagged documents
related to the location.

Because news articles, themselves are documents, they can
also be represented as topic vectors by ESA. Thus, ESA pro-
vides an identical semantic representation for both locations
and articles. In addition, this is a ﬁne-grained representa-
tion of locations and articles due to the rich world-knowledge
of Wikipedia. However, some topics that are irrelevant to
l can be included in Dl. Since ESA does not consider any
geographical context of a location, it is aﬀected by those
irrelevant topics.

ELSA is diﬀerent from ESA in that it considers the ge-
ographical context of a location in expressing the locations
and articles. ELSA reinforces ESA with a local topic dis-
tribution. Figure 2 shows the graphical representation of
ELSA. Here, a document d ∈ Dl depends on topics t ∈ T ,
and the topics are dependent on a location l. Note that l
and d are the observed variables, while t is the unobserved
one. θl denotes the local topic distribution at l and θt is the
word distribution of the topic t. Both are also unobserved
variables.

(2)

p(w|ti, θti ) =

1 + nci (w)

|Wci| +

w∈ci nci (w)

,

(4)

(cid:6)

where Wci is a set of words in ci and nci (w) is the frequency
of w in ci.
4.2 Estimating Local Topic Distribution

The local topic distribution p(ti|l, θl) denotes the proba-
bility of a topic ti at the location l. However, most topics
at l are often coherent so that they are dependent on one
another. This dependency among topics makes it diﬃcult
to estimate p(ti|l, θl) directly. Thus, ELSA ﬁrst constructs
the dependency structure of local topics of l, and then ap-
proximates p(ti|l, θl) with it.
As a ﬁrst step to derive p(ti|l, θl), all topics related to l
should be identiﬁed. Because p(Dl|ti, θti ) is the probability
that topic ti generates geo-tagged documents Dl of l, the
actual topics of l are those with non-zero p(Dl|ti, θti ). We
denote the set of these actual topics as Tl. Then, the de-
pendency structure of the topics of Tl is constructed using
the link information within Wikipedia articles. Wikipedia
articles often contain hyperlinks to other articles. These hy-
perlinks have semantics because all Wikipedia articles are
published and managed carefully and manually by massive
users, According to Kamps and Kollen [10], the hyperlinks
in Wikipedia articles reﬂect semantic relationships among
Wikipedia concepts. Because ELSA uses Wikipedia con-
cepts as its geographical topics, it is natural to use these link

296Tom
Morgan

Sports in
Los Angeles

Los Angeles 

Angels of Anaheim

Los Angeles 

Times

Angel Stadium 
of Anaheim

Anaheim 
Convention 
Center

Anaheim
Splash

Titan
Stadium

Eric
Young

American
League

Los Angeles
Marathon

Major League 

Baseball

Baseball
World Cup

Texas Rangers 
Hall of Fame 
and Museum

Texas
League
Arlington
Stadium
Rangers
Ballpark in
Arlington

Texas Rangers 
minor league 

players

Mark
Holtz

Texas
Rangers

Arlington
Country

professional
baseball

John
Hart
Major League 

Baseball

Baseball
World Cup

Big 12 

Championship 

Game

Tom
Morgan

Los Angeles
Marathon

John
Hart

Major League 

Baseball

Sports in
Los Angeles

Los Angeles 

Angels of Anaheim

Los Angeles 

Times
Anaheim 
Convention 
Center

Anaheim
Splash

Titan
Stadium

Angel Stadium 
of Anaheim

Baseball
World Cup
Eric
Young

American
League

Texas Rangers 
minor league 

players

Mark
Holtz

Texas
Rangers

Texas Rangers 
Hall of Fame 
and Museum

Texas
League
Arlington
Stadium
Rangers
Ballpark in
Arlington

Arlington
Country

professional
baseball

Big 12 

Championship 

Game

(a) Topic graph for Angel Stadium

(b) Topic graph for Rangers Ballpark

(c) Combined topic graph for both locations

Figure 3: Diﬀerent major topics of ELSA and PESA at two baseball stadiums.

information among topics in Tl for the dependency structure
of the topics. ELSA represents the dependency structure as
a directed graph. For instance, when Central park has a
hyperlink to National historic landmark, the corresponding
dependency exists from Central park to National historic
landmark.
When the dependency structure of Tl is given, ELSA ap-
proximates p(ti|l, θl) from it according to the PageRank al-
gorithm [16], because the values obtained from PageRank
can be regarded as probabilities of the graph nodes in a
complicated link structure [8]. That is, p(ti|l, θl) is

p(ti|l, θl) ≈ P R(ti)

1 − α|Tl| + α ·

=

(cid:2)

t(cid:2)∈in(ti,Tl)

(cid:3)

P R(t
(cid:3)
L(t
)

)

,

(5)

where α is a damping factor, in(ti, Tl) is the set of topics
in Tl with a link to ti, and L(t
) is the number of outbound
links from t

.

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

4.3 Article Representation

ELSA projects a location onto the topic space of Wikipedia
concepts through a set of geo-tagged documents. Therefore,
when a set of news articles, A = {a1, a2, . . . , an} is given, all
articles of A can be projected onto the topic space because
news articles are also documents. Thus, the projection of an
article a ∈ A can be written as

Φ(a) =

p(a, t1, l|θl, θt1 ), . . . , p(a, t|T|, l|θl, θt|T| )

.

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

Since we assume that the location probability p(l) is uniform,

p(a, ti, l|θl, θti ) = p(a, ti|l, θl, θti ) · p(l)

∝ p(a, ti|l, θl, θti ).

According to Figure 2, p(a, ti|l, θl, θti ) = p(a|ti, θti )·p(ti|l, θl).

Thus,
p(a, ti, l|θl, θti ) ∝ p(a|ti, θti ) · p(ti|l, θl)

(cid:5)

p(w|ti, θti )
= p(ti|l, θl) ·
(cid:2)
w∈a
log p(w|ti, θti )
∝ log p(ti|l, θl) +
(cid:7)
(cid:2)
(cid:6)

= log p(ti|l, θl) ·

w∈a

log

|Wci| +

w∈a

(cid:8)

,

1 + nci (w)

w∈ci nci (w)

where na(w) denotes the frequency of a word w in a. The
term p(ti|l, θl) is the local topic distribution given in Equa-
tion (5). Because this term depends on l, it becomes diﬀer-
ent for every diﬀerent l. As a result, even the same news
article is represented diﬀerently if the location changes.
4.4 Comparison with PESA

The probabilistic ESA (PESA) is another topical repre-
sentation of documents based on ESA [21], and is designed
to compare locations through geo-tagged documents. It as-
signs high similarity to the pairs of locations in the same
geographical category, while assigning very low similarities
to the pairs of locations from diﬀerent categories. For this,
it regards, as geographical topics, the Wikipedia concepts
of which a Wikipedia article has geo-tags or hyperlinks to
other geo-tagged Wikipedia articles. Then, PESA uses these
geographical topics to estimate a topic distribution.

PESA also estimates a topic distribution to reﬂect depen-
dencies among topics. Because it considers the dependency
of almost all topics, the global topics shared by most lo-
cations in a geographical category have high probabilities
in the topic distribution of PESA. These global topics are
important in PESA, since PESA focuses on location com-
parison in which similar locations share geographical top-
ics. On the other hand, the task of a localized news article
recommendation aims to oﬀer appropriate articles for each
speciﬁc location. That is, the local characteristics are more
important in this task than the global characteristics. Many

297Table 1: Locations used in the experiments and their
categories

Geographical category

Locations

Airport

Baseball stadium

National park

George Bush Airport

John F. Kennedy Airport

La Guardia Airport

Phoenix Sky Harbor Airport
Washington Dulles Airport
Angels Stadium of Anaheim

Busch stadium

Citizens Bank Park
Rangers Ballpark

Turner Field

Arches

Grand Canyon

Hawaii Volcanoes
Rocky Mountain

Yellowstone

topics that are important globally are often not important
locally. Therefore, PESA is unsuitable for this task.

ELSA estimates the distribution of only local topics. In
the topic distribution of ELSA, the topics directly associated
with a given location have high probabilities. As a result,
even the locations from the same category have diﬀerent
topic distributions. This is reasonable because the locations
could have diﬀerent geographical context even if they belong
to the same category.

The advantage of ELSA can be addressed by a simple ex-
ample. Figure 3 shows the topic structures of two locations:
Angel Stadium at Anaheim, CA (Figure 3(a)) and Rangers
Ballpark at Arlington, TX (Figure 3(b)). In these graphs,
the nodes are topics and the edges are their dependencies.
The top thirteen topics were chosen from each location ac-
cording to the probabilities over its Dl.

ELSA assigns high probabilities to the black nodes in each
graph, because the nodes are local hubs. When the location
is Angel Stadium, “Los Angeles, Angels of Anaheim” and
“Angel Stadium of Anaheim” have high probabilities. On
the other hand, the highest probability is assigned to the
topic of “Texas Rangers” in the topic distribution of Rangers
Ballpark. As a result, even the same article would be repre-
sented diﬀerently due to these diﬀerent local topics.

PESA uses the dependency structure of all topics. Thus,
it determines the topic distribution from the combined graph
in Figure 3(c). After the graphs of Figure 3(a) and 3(b) are
combined, the topics such as “Major League Baseball” and
“Baseball World Cup” (gray nodes in this graph) are con-
sidered as hubs. These topics shared by two locations force
the topic vectors of the locations to be similar. Therefore,
PESA is eﬀective in location comparison. However, the em-
phasis on global topics is adverse to localized news article
recommendation in which local topics are preferable.

5. EXPERIMENTS
5.1 Experimental Settings

For the evaluation of ELSA, ﬁfteen locations in USA are
selected manually. Table 1 lists the locations and their cate-
gories. All locations belong to one of three geographical cat-

Table 2: Statistics of the Flickr data

Avg. doc-

Avg.

uments
177.8

179.0

201.0

keywords

7.49

8.66

6.74

Category

Airport
Baseball
stadium

National park

Unique
keywords

1,895

900

1,010

egories:
‘Airport’, ‘Baseball stadium’, and ‘National park’.
The keywords of the Flickr images are used as a set of geo-
tagged documents, Dl for location l. These are adopted as
geo-tagged documents because the keywords are often a de-
scription of the location. For each location, l in Table 1, the
images that are closely associated with l are crawled through
Flickr API (http://www.flickr.com/services/api). The
GPS information attached to the images is used to deter-
mine their association with l. We determined that the image
would be associated with l if the distance from l to the im-
age location is within a predeﬁned threshold. The threshold
used was 0.2 km for ‘Baseball stadium’, 1 km for ‘Airport’,
and 10 km for ‘National park’. The keywords tagged to an
image are regarded as a geo-tagged document.

Table 2 describes the Flickr data set used in the experi-
ments. The locations in the category of ‘Airport’ have 177.8
documents on average, whereas those in ‘Baseball stadium’
and ‘National park’ have 179 and 201 documents, respec-
tively. The average number of keywords in a document is
7.49 in ‘Airport’, 8.66 in ‘Baseball stadium’, and 6.74 in
‘National park’. The last attribute is the number of unique
keywords. ‘Airport’ has 1,895 unique keywords, and ‘Base-
ball stadium’ and ‘National park’ have 900 and 1,010 unique
keywords respectively.

A Wikipedia snapshot as of May 2, 2012 was used to gen-
erate geographical topics. A preprocessing described in [21]
was adapted to the snapshot to exclude irrelevant topics,
such as digit, time, and so on. After preprocessing, 1,116,275
concepts remain, and they are used for a topic set T in all
the experiments below. The number of unique terms in this
Wikipedia snapshot was 1,498,045.

The New York Times (NYT) corpus was adopted as a
pool of news articles. This corpus contained 1,841,402 arti-
cles published by the New York Times from 1987 to 2007.
Among them, the articles from January 1, 2006 to June 19,
2007 were actually used as a set of news articles, A. This
set contained 127,005 articles composed of 356,595 distinct
words.

ELSA was compared using four baseline methods: BOW,
LDA, ESA, and PESA. BOW is the bag-of-words model that
represents locations and articles with the frequency of words.
Thus, the need for a topic model in a localized article recom-
mendation can be shown by a comparison with BOW. Three
topic-based models, LDA, ESA, and PESA were prepared
to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of ELSA. LDA is the Latent
Dirichlet Allocation that is used widely in the various appli-
cations to extract topics from documents. ESA and PESA
both use Wikipedia concepts as their topics, but PESA addi-
tionally models the prior distribution of geographical topics.
The performance of these methods were compared with
two metrics: (i) Rt10 (Rating of Top 10), the average score
of recommended articles, and (ii) Normalized Discounted
Cumulative Gain at top k (NDCG@k) which is widely used

298Table 3: Kappa values of the articles scores by the
human evaluators and actual number of news arti-
cles per location.

Category

Kappa value

Airport
Baseball
stadium

National park

Overall

0.510

0.677

0.680
0.623

Avg. distinct articles

per location
32.8 ± 2.2
28.0 ± 6.5
31.0 ± 3.7
30.6 ± 4.6

Table 4: Rt10 of the experimental methods

1.490

Category BOW LDA
Airport
1.620
Baseball
stadium
National

2.110

1.940

ESA
1.710

1.290

PESA ELSA
2.119
1.700

1.800

2.400

1.620

1.490

1.560

1.470

0.700

park

Overall

1.690

1.420

1.540

1.663

2.026

for measuring the rank accuracy. Two human evaluators are
employed to label the scores of news articles manually. Since
there are too many articles in the data set, the evaluation
was done only for the recommended articles. That is, for a
given location, all ﬁve methods including ELSA select their
own top ten articles. Accordingly, the number of news arti-
cles per location is at most 50. Since two or more methods
can recommend the same articles, the evaluators score nor-
mally less than 50 articles per each location. The guidelines
of scoring news articles are as follows.

• 0 point: The article has nothing to with the geograph-

ical category.

• 1 point: The article is weakly related to the geograph-

ical category.

• 2 point: The article belongs to the geographical cate-

gory, but is not related to the location.

• 3 point: The article is strongly related to the location.
Table 3 lists the Kappa values of the scores by the eval-
uators. As shown in this table, Kappa values for ‘Baseball
stadium’ and ‘National park’ were approximately 0.68, and
approximately 30 distinct articles are recommended for each
location. These values corresponded to substantial agree-
ment. For ‘Airport’, the Kappa value was 0.51, which falls
in moderate agreement, and the average distinct articles per
location was 32.8.
5.2 Experimental Results

Table 4 shows the Rt10 values of the ﬁve methods. As
shown in this table, LDA achieved 1.420, which was the
worst performance. This Rt10 was obtained when LDA
shows the best performance with 500 topics. The fact that
LDA was worst among the ﬁve methods implies that it fails
to capture diverse topics of news articles and locations. On
the other hand, all methods based on Wikipedia concepts
outperform LDA. This result highlights the eﬀectiveness of
the Wikipedia concepts as geographical topics.

BOW showed the second best performance with 1.69 of
Rt10. This is an unexpected result, because BOW does not
adopt topics to represent articles and locations. The good
performance of BOW originates mostly from the locations
of ‘Baseball stadium’. Most geo-tagged documents for base-
ball stadiums contain the name of home teams, which al-
lows a simple lexical matching to work well. As a result, the
Rt10 score of BOW for ‘Baseball stadium’ was very high.
However, its performance in other categories was lower than
ESA-based topic models. Therefore, from the results of LDA
and BOW the topical representation leads to high perfor-
mance in localized article recommendation, if the topic space
is rich enough to cover the entire topics.

ELSA was found to be the best method in this experi-
ment. ELSA achieved signiﬁcantly higher performance than
the other methods. Its Rt10 in ‘Airport’ and ‘Baseball sta-
dium’ was much higher than those of others. In ‘National
park’, ESA showed the best Rt10 of 1.620, but the diﬀer-
ence between ELSA and ESA was only 0.06. As a result,
ELSA outperformed all other methods with an overall Rt10
of 2.026, and was the only method of which the overall Rt10
was more than 2.0. The outperformance of ELSA over other
methods was statistically signiﬁcant with a conﬁdence in-
terval of 95%. The p-values of the T-test against the null
hypothesis that ELSA does not outperform other methods
were all below 0.05. The essential factor of ELSA that dis-
tinguishes it from ESA and PESA is the use of the local
topic distribution as the geographical context of a location,
Therefore, the best performance of ELSA proves the impor-
tance of a geographical context of locations in location and
article representation.

The overall quality of the recommended articles can be
veriﬁed by Rt10. However, the quality of a method can
be poor, even if the method achieves a high Rt10. This
occurs when a large number of recommended news articles
receive 1 or 2 point by human evaluators. Therefore, it is
important to determine how many articles receive 2 or 3
point. Figure 4 shows the number of recommended articles
for each score. As shown in this ﬁgure, the quality of ELSA is
best in that most of the articles recommended by it received
2 or 3 point.
In particular, an examination of the overall
category (Figure 4-(d)) showed that, the number of articles
with 3 point recommended by ELSA exceeded those by other
methods. Note that most articles recommended by PESA
received 2 point. This is because PESA uses the distribution
of all topics, which makes it diﬃcult for the locations within
the same category to be distinguished. On the other hand,
even though ELSA shares topics with PESA, it eﬀectively
characterizes the geographical context of each location by
its local topic distribution. As a result, ELSA recommends
the articles that match the given location better than the
other methods.

The Rt10 scores and number of articles with high scores
have a tendency to decrease, as the location boundary be-
comes larger. The Rt10 score for ‘National park’ that has a
boundary of 10 km was the worst, whereas that for ‘Base-
ball stadium’ with a boundary of 0.2 km was the best. This
is because a location has a range of geographical topics as
its boundary becomes large, and this variety of topics de-
creases the locality eﬀect of the topics. However, ELSA
outperformed the other methods regardless of how large the
location boundary was.

299(a) Airport

(b) Baseball stadium

(c) National park

(d) Overall category

Figure 4: Number of news articles for each score.

The ranking performance of the methods was also mea-
sured with NDCG@k. Figure 5 shows the NDCG@k values
with k from 1 to 10. Even with this metric, ELSA out-
performed the others for all geographical categories. Al-
though PESA achieved a similar performance in ‘Baseball
stadium’, its performance was lower than ESA and BOW in
‘National park’. BOW showed the lowest NDCG@k when k
was less than 3. Because it considers only the shared words
by the news articles and geo-tagged documents, it recom-
mends many irrelevant articles with some general words. For
instance, many articles with a word, angel are irrelevant to
Angel Stadium, and those with bush are irrelevant to George
Bush Airport.

ELSA outperformed the others consistently for all k’s. All
improvements in NDCG@k of ELSA over the other methods
are also statistically signiﬁcant, because the p-values against
the null hypothesis were less than 0.05. In particular, when
k ≤ 3, a large gap between ELSA and other methods was
observed. As k was increased up to 10, this gap became
smaller but was still higher than others. This result suggests
that ELSA recommends news articles successfully that are
appropriate to the geographical context.

PESA was the second best and also reﬂected the distri-
bution of geographical topics in representing articles with
topics. Thus, the superiority of ELSA and PESA over other

methods proves the importance of geographical topics in the
localized news article recommendation. Interestingly, ELSA
and ESA showed a similar tendency in NDCG@k for all cat-
egories as k increased even though NDCG@k of ELSA was
always higher than that of ESA. This fact implies that ELSA
improves ESA successfully and substantially as its expansion
for localized news article recommendation by adopting the
local topic distribution.

6. CONCLUSION

This paper proposed a localized news article recommenda-
tion with the Explicit Localized Semantic Analysis (ELSA).
The location of a user provides valuable information as user
context, because each location has its own geographical top-
ics, which are often strongly related to the user context at
that location. Therefore, the proposed method recommends
the news articles that are appropriate to the location by re-
ﬂecting the geographical context of user. For this, ELSA
represents news articles as the topic vectors of Wikipedia
concepts. The weight of each topic for an article is adjusted
to reﬂect the geographical context of the user. The user
location is also expressed as a topic vector through the geo-
tagged documents of the user location. Because the con-
cerns of the user are aﬀected by his/her location, even the
same article should be represented diﬀerently according to

300(a) Airport

(b) Baseball stadium

(c) National park

(d) Overall categories

Figure 5: NDCG@k scores with various k.

the user’s location. To reﬂect it into article recommendation,
ELSA models the dependencies of local topics. Then, the lo-
cal topic distribution estimated from the topic dependencies
is applied to represent both locations and news articles.

ELSA was evaluated with the New York Times corpus
for ﬁfteen famous locations.
It was compared with four
other methods: BOW, LDA, ESA, and PESA. All the meth-
ods were evaluated with two kinds of metrics: Rt10 and
NDCG@k. According to the experimental results, ELSA
outperformed all other methods substantially. The superi-
ority of ELSA over BOW and LDA implies the eﬀectiveness
of the topic space by the Wikipedia concepts. PESA, an-
other ESA-based topic model achieved higher performance
than other methods including ESA, itself. Although both
ELSA and PESA adopt the topic space by Wikipedia con-
cepts, they are diﬀerent in that ELSA uses a local topic
distribution whereas PESA uses a global topic distribution.
The performance of ELSA was superior to that of PESA in
both metrics, because the local topic distribution is more
appropriate than the global topic distribution in localized
article recommendation.

The contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, this
is the ﬁrst eﬀort to recommend articles according to user
locations. Although every location has its own geograph-
ical topics, most legacy localized recommendation systems

focused on their physical attributes. In this paper, by con-
sidering topics of a location as its geographical context, the
articles that match the geographical context of a location
could be recommended. Second, we manually constructed a
data set for localized article recommendation. 459 news ar-
ticles out of approximately 120,000 articles of the New York
Times were tagged with scores from 0 to 3 with respect to
their relevance to ﬁfteen locations. Because this is the ﬁrst
data set for localized article recommendation, it can be used
for further developments.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Industrial Strategic Tech-
nology Development Program (10035348, Development of
a Cognitive Planning and Learning Model for Mobile Plat-
forms) funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy (MKE,
Korea).

7. REFERENCES

[1] J. Bao, M. Mokbel, and C. Chow. GeoFeed: A

location-aware news feed system. In Proceedings of the
28th IEEE International Conference on Data
Engineering, pages 54–65, 2012.

301[2] D. Blei, A. Ng, and M. Jordan. Latent Dirichlet

Allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
3:993–1022, 2003.

[3] T. Bogers and A. Bosch. Comparing and evaluating

information retrieval algorithms for news
recommendation. In Proceedings of ACM conference
on Recommender systems, pages 141–144, 2007.

[4] T. Dao, S. Jeong, and H. Ahn. A novel

recommendation model of location-based advertising:
Context-aware collaborative ﬁltering using ga
approach. Expert Systems with Applications,
39(3):3731–3739, 2012.

[5] O. Egozi, S. Markovitch, and E. Gabrilovich.

Concept-based information retrieval using Explicit
Semantic Analysis. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems, 29(2):8:1–8:34, 2011.

[6] J. Eisenstein, B. O’Connor, N. A. Smith, and E. P.
Xing. A latent variable model for geographic lexical
variation. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1277–1287, 2010.

[7] E. Gabrilovich and S. Markovitch. Computing

semantic relatedness using Wikipedia-based Explicit
Semantic Analysis. In Proceedings of the 20th
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pages 1606–1611, 2007.

[8] T. Griﬃths, M. Steyvers, and A. Firl. Google and the

mind: Predicting ﬂuency with PageRank.
Psychological Science, 18(12):1069–1076, 2007.

[9] L. Hong, A. Ahmed, S. Gurumurth, A. Smola, and

K. Tsioutsiouliklis. Discovering geographical topics in
the twitter stream. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on World Wide Web, pages
769–778, 2012.

[10] J. Kamps and M. Koolen. The importance of link
evidence in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 30th
European Conference on IR Research, pages 270–282,
2008.

[11] R. Krestel, P. Fankhauser, and W. Nejdl. Latent
Dirichlet Allocation for tag recommendation. In
Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems, pages 61–68, 2009.

[12] Y. Li, A. Guo, S. Liu, Y. Gao, and Y. Zheng. A

location based reminder system for advertisement. In
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on
Multimedia, pages 1501–1502, 2010.

[13] Q. Mei, C. Liu, and H. Su. A probabilistic approach to

spatiotemporal theme pattern mining on weblogs. In
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
World Wide Web, pages 533–542, 2006.

[14] M. Mokbel, J. Bao, A. Eldawy, J. Levandoski, and

M. Sarwat. Personalization, socialization, and
recommendations in location-based services 2.0. In
Proceedings of the International Workshop on
Personalized Access, Proﬁle Management, and Context
Awareness in Databases 2011, collocated with VLDB,
pages 1–6, 2011.

[15] R. Mooney and L. Roy. Content-based book

recommending using learning for text categorization.
In Proceedings of the SIGIR-99 Workshop on
Recommender Systems: Algorithms and Evaluation,
1999.

[16] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. The
pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web.
Technical report, Computer Systems Laboratory,
Stanford University, 1998.

[17] M. Park, J. Hong, and S. Cho. Location-based
recommendation system using bayesian user’s
preference model in mobile devices. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Ubiquitous
Intelligence and Computing, pages 1130–1139, 2007.
[18] D. Ramage, D. Hall, R. Nallapati, and C. Manning.

Labeled LDA: a supervised topic model for credit
attribution in multi-labeled corpora. In Proceedings of
the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 248–256, 2009.

[19] N. Savage, M. Baranski, N. Chavez, and T. H¨ollerer.

I’m feeling loco: A location based context aware
recommendation system. In Advances in
Location-Based Services, pages 37–54, 2012.

[20] S. Sizov. GeoFolk: Latent spatial semantics in web 2.0

social media. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining, pages 281–290, 2010.

[21] J. Son, Y. Noh, H. Song, S. Park, and S. Lee. Location

comparison through geographical topics. In
Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on Web Intelligence, pages
311–318, 2012.

[22] Y. Takeuchi and M. Sugimoto. CityVoyager: An

outdoor recommendation system based on user
location history. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Ubiquitous Intelligence
and Computing, pages 625–636, 2006.

[23] X. Wei and B. Croft. LDA-based document models for

ad-hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pages
178–185, 2006.

[24] M. Ye, P. Yin, and W. Lee. Location recommendation

for location-based social networks. In Proceedings of
the 18th SIGSPATIAL International Conference on
Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pages
458–461, 2010.

[25] Z. Yin, L. Cao, J. Han, C. Zhai, and T. Huang.
Geographical topic discovery and comparison. In
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
World Wide Web, pages 247–256, 2011.

[26] C. Yu and H. Chang. Personalized location-based

recommendation services for tour planning in mobile
tourism applications. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on E-Commerce and Web
Technologies, pages 38–49, 2009.

[27] V. Zheng, B. Cao, Y. Zheng, X. Xie, and Q. Yang.

Collaborative ﬁltering meets mobile recommendation:
A user-centered approach. In Proceedings of the 24th
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages
236–241, 2010.

[28] Y. Zhou and J. Luo. Geo-location inference on news
articles via multimodal pLSA. In Proceedings of the
20th ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
pages 741–744, 2012.

302