Browse with a Social Web Directory

Hao Huang†,‡

Yunjun Gao†

Lu Chen†

Rui Li§

Kevin Chiew♯

Qinming He†

†College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China

‡School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore

§Computer Science Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

♯School of Engineering, Tan Tao University, Vietnam

†{hh14311, gaoyj, chenl, hqm}@zju.edu.cn, §ruili1@uiuc.edu, ♯kevin.chiew@ttu.edu.vn

ABSTRACT
Browse with either web directories or social bookmarks is an
important complementation to search by keywords in web
information retrieval. To improve users’ browse experiences
and facilitate the web directory construction, in this paper,
we propose a novel browse system called Social Web Di-
rectory (SWD for short) by integrating web directories and
social bookmarks.
In SWD, (1) web pages are automati-
cally categorized to a hierarchical structure to be retrieved
eﬃciently, and (2) the popular web pages, hottest tags, and
expert users in each category are ranked to help users ﬁnd
information more conveniently. Extensive experimental re-
sults demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our SWD system.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.3 [Information Systems Applications]: Communi-
cations Applications—Information browsers

Keywords
Browse system; web page categorization; social ranking

1.

INTRODUCTION

Besides search by keywords, browse systems provide an
alternative way for web information retrieval [6], especially
when there is a lack of appropriate keywords or comprehen-
sion and learning processes are required during the retrieval
tasks. Thus far, we have seen two generations of browse sys-
tems, i.e., (1) web directories, such as Yahoo Web Directory
and Open Directory Project (www.dmoz.org), in which web
pages are collected and categorized manually by skillful edi-
tors, and (2) social bookmarking and tagging services, such
as Del.icio.us and citeulike.com, which enable users to an-
notate web pages by themselves. Nonetheless, these browse
systems still have a few minor ﬂaws in two aspects, namely
(1) lack of an automatic categorization on web pages. To
be speciﬁc, the maintenance of a web directory requires ex-
tensive human eﬀorts, while the social bookmarks and tags

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

provided by various individuals often suﬀer from noisy and
ambiguous annotations as well as various personal catego-
rizations [4]; and (2) lack of page ranking, although web
pages ranked by their popularity often help users ﬁnd infor-
mation more eﬃciently and conveniently.

Aiming at improving users’ browse experiences and facili-
tating the web directory construction, we propose a novel
browse system known as SWD (Social Web Directory),
which adopts the social information (e.g., web page tags)
from Del.icio.us to automatically categorize web pages with
the help of the well-edited hierarchical catalog structure in
Open Directory Project, and ranks the web pages in each
category by estimating their popularity. Furthermore, SWD
can also identify expert users and the hottest tags in each
category which enrich the category’s description, and thus
can support community based-exploratory browse [5].

Extensive experiments have been conducted on 18,304 web
pages from Open Directory Project together with 604,032
annotations from Del.icio.us, and the results show that com-
pared with a straightforward method, i.e., using the pure
content of each web page for categorization, our SWD sys-
tem improves 27.9% of accurary on web page categorization
and 72% of eﬃciency. Moreover, our case study conﬁrms
that the expert users and hottest tags in each category iden-
tiﬁed by SWD are of high quality and can help users explore
the category information more eﬀectively.

2. SYSTEM OVERVIEW

The system contains three parts, i.e., a training data de-
pository, and two models constructed with this depository.
The training data depository is automatically obtained by
merging the well-edited web page catalog of Open Directory
Project (ODP for short) and web page tags from Del.icio.us.
Speciﬁcally, the web pages of which the URLs are within
both ODP and Del.icio.us are collected into our training
data depository. Then, any web page in the depository has
information including users who collected it, tags used to
annotate it, and the category it belongs to.

With the training data depository, there are two models
constructed in SWD, i.e., (1) the web page categorization
model, which classiﬁes any newly collected web page into
an existing category according to its tags, and (2) the social
ranking model, which provides a ranking list of the popular
web pages, hottest tags, and expert users in each category.
Fig. 1 shows two snapshots of our SWD system, in which
Part A lists the top categories, Part C the sub-categories,
Parts B & D the corresponding web pages, Part E the hottest
tags in current category, and Part F the expert users.

865Figure 1: Interface of SWD system

Figure 2: Average Similarity between Categories

3. WEB PAGE CATEGORIZATION MODEL
Compared with previous methods which based on web
page contents and URLs [2, 10] , we propose a more eﬃcient
approach to web page categorization by only investigating
the web page tags annotated by users. This is motivated by
our preliminary study on the tags, which reveal that these
tags can usually describe the web page accurately, and mean-
while, web pages under the same category often have similar
tags and vice versa. For example, Fig. 2 illustrates the aver-
age tag-based similarity between the web pages in diﬀerent
categories, which is deﬁned as

sim(cx, cy) = Ppi∈cx,pj ∈cy

cosine(pi, pj)

|cx| × |cy|

where |cx| and |cy| denote the number of web pages in cat-
egories cx and cy, pi and pj are web pages in each category,
cosine(pi, pj) = pi×pj
. Here, wki

Pk wki×wkj

|pi|×|pj | =

√Pk w2

ki×qPk w2

kj

represents the tag Tk’s weight in a web page pi, and can be
calculated by the tf-idf metric, i.e.,

wki =

f req(Tk, pi)

max16l6t f req(Tl, pi) × lg

N
nk

in which f req(Tk, pi) is the number of times the tag Tk is
used to annotate web page pi by diﬀerent users, N the to-
tal number of web pages, nk the number of the web pages
containing tag Tk, and t the total number of web page tags
collected in SWD. From Fig. 2, we can learn that tags are
discriminative features for categorization since the average
tag-based similarity between web pages of the same category
is much higher than those from diﬀerent categories.

Based on the above discussion, we can utilize web page

tags to represent each web page pi as a vector below.

pi = (w1i, w2i, . . . , wki, . . . , wti).

(1)

Then, classiﬁcation methods such as Naive Bayes, SVM, and
KNN can be adopted to help SWD categorize web pages by
using these vectors.

4. SOCIAL RANKING MODEL

In traditional web directories, web pages of each category
are listed randomly or chronologically, resulting in that web
pages of high quality are often hidden in the mass collections
and thus are inconvenient for retrieval. In social bookmark
ﬁelds, although a few ranking algorithms are proposed to
provide the most popular web pages in each category based
on the web page tags [1,9], they often surfer from a relatively

high time complexity or just oﬀer a static rank which is not
related to the category.

To avoid the above limitations of existing browse systems,
we provide a social ranking model for our SWD system,
which can rank the popular web pages as well as expert
users and the hottest tags of each category eﬃciently.

4.1 Popular Web Pages

of which each element puser

Since each web page pi has a set of associated users and a
set of tags, it can also be represented as (1) a binary vector
puser
(1 6 r 6 u, u is the total
i
number of users who have collected web pages for SWD)
indicates whether web page pi is collected by the rth user,
and (2) a binary vector ptag
ik (1 6
k 6 t) denotes whether web page pi has the tag Tk. With
these two binary vectors, we measure web pages’ popularity
based on the following two features.

of which each element ptag

ir

i

User Count. If a web page is collected by many users, it
is often of a high quality and should be recommended to the
other users. Hence, we identify these kinds of web pages by
the user count U C(pi) of each web page pi, where

U C(pi) = X16r6u

puser
ir

.

Topical Similarity. The topical similarity T S(pi|cx) be-
tween a page pi and a given category cx also indicates whether
this web page should have a high rank in the category.

T S(pi|cx) = consine(ptag

i

, ctag
x )

x

is the category vector of cx represented by tags,
ik , here

where ctag
of which each element ctag
1 6 k 6 t and I(·) is the indicator function.
cx can be calculated as

Then the popularity P op(pi|cx) of a page pi in a category

xk = Pi I(pi ∈ cx) × ptag

P op(pi|cx) =

T S(pi|cx)

maxpj ∈cx T S(pj|cx)

+

U C(pi)

maxpj ∈cx U C(pj)

.

4.2 Expert Users

Listing up expert users can help a new user ﬁnd useful web
pages via their collected web pages, and meanwhile stimulate
users to collect new web pages of high qualities into our
system. To this end, we present the following three metrics
to help identify the expert users of each category.

Collection Quality. This metric checks whether the web

pages collected by a user ur are useful in a category cx.

Quality(ur|cx) = Xpi∈cx,pi∈ur

P op(pi|cx)

where pi ∈ ur denotes that user ur collects web page pi.

866Table 1: Categorization performance comparison

NB

SVM

Method

Pure Content Based
Description Based

Mi-F Ma-F Mi-F Ma-F
0.576
0.565
0.636
0.662
0.775
Proposed SWD System 0.790
0.792
0.790

0.431
0.505
0.691
0.662

0.626
0.672
0.801
0.811

Combined Method

Interests of Users. The metric examines whether a user
ur is a specialist to a category cx by estimating the relevance
between his collection and the category.
Interest(ur|cx) = cosine(utag
is a binary vector of which each element utag
rk

where utag
(1 6 k 6 t) indicates whether user ur has used tag Tk.

, ctag
x )

r

r

Contributions of Users. This metric is provided to en-
courage users to collect new web pages of high qualities for
our system. The contribution Con(ur|cx) of a user ur to a
category cx is deﬁned as

Con(ur|cx) = Xpi∈cx,pi∈ur

(cid:18) U C(pi)
2d +

T S(pi|cx)

d

(cid:19)

where d denotes that ur is the dth user who collected pi.

4.3 Hottest Tags

The hottest tags in each category help describe the cate-
gory and can also navigate users to their target web pages.
The hotness Hot(Tk|cx) of the tag Tk (1 6 k 6 t) for
a category cx can be estimated by investigating the tag’s
frequency of occurrences in this category and in all the cat-
egories, formally,

f req(Tk, pi)

f req(Tk, pi)

Hot(Tk|cx) = Ppi∈cx
PTl∈cx Ppj ∈cx
where Tl ∈ cx means that a tag Tl appears in a category cx.
5. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

Ppi∈cx
Py Ppj ∈cy

f req(Tl, pj)×

f req(Tk, pj)

5.1 Experiments on Web Page Categorization
Experimental Setup. We collect 18,304 web pages over
60 categories and sub-categories from ODP together their
7,691 tags which are used as annotations for 604,032 times.
We represent each web page as a vector by Eq. (1) (see
Section 3), and respectively utilize Naive Bayes Classiﬁer
(NB for short) and SVM as the classiﬁcation methods.

To evaluate the average categorization performance of our
SWD system across all categories, we adopt the micro- and
macro-average F-scores (Mi-F and Ma-F for short) as the
performance metrics, and perform 5-fold cross-validation to
reduce the uncertainty of training data and test data.

Performance Study. Besides our SWD system, we also
report the web page categorization performance of the fol-
lowing three methods, i.e., (1) the pure content based method,
which straightforwardly uses the text content of each web
page for the categorization, (2) a state-of-the-art descrip-
tion based method [8], and (3) a combined method, which
combines the categorization results of our proposed method
and the pure content based method as follows.

T arget(pi) = arg max

cx (cid:16)α·Pcont(cx|pi)+(1−α)·PSW D(cx|pi)(cid:17)

d
o
h
t
e
M
 
d
e
n
b
m
o
C

i

 
f
o
 
F
−
M

i

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

 
0

SVM

NB

0.5

value of α

(a)

 

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
P
D
W
S

 

0.2

 

 

Ma−F

Mi−F

2

4

6

8

Number of Users

(b)

Figure 3: (a) Mi-F of combined method vs. α. (b)
SWD categorization performance vs. user number

where Pcont(cx|pi) and PSW D(cx|pi) denote the probability
of a web page pi belonging to a category cx by using the
pure content based method and our proposed method.

Table 1 shows that our propose method achieves a 27.9%
improvement over the pure content based method and 19.1%
over the description based method. In addition, the com-
bined method gets a slight improvement over our method
since it can beneﬁts from both the two methods combined.
To investigate which method provides more proﬁt in this
combination, we vary the parameter α from 0 to 1. When
α = 0, the combined method is equivalent to ours, and when
α = 1, it is equivalent to the description based method.
Fig. 3(a) shows that the combined method often performs
better when the weight of our method is higher, indicating
that our method contributes more in the combination.

Moreover, previous studies have shown that most of clas-
siﬁcation algorithms including NB and SVM are often sensi-
tive to the document length when using the content of each
web page for categorization [7]. However, since the number
of each web page’s tags is much less than that of the words
within each web page’s content, our proposed approach to
web page categorization is more eﬃcient on both time and
space. Taking the NB algorithm as an example, experimen-
tal results demonstrate that it saves 90% in terms of space
and 72% in terms of running time.

Eﬀect of Annotation Amount. The above perfor-
mance study veriﬁes the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of our
SWD system on web page categorization. In what follows,
we address another concern, i.e., whether the categorization
are stable and at least how many annotations should be col-
lected by SWD to guarantee its categorization performance.
To this end, we examine how the Ma-F and Mi-F of our
categorization results are aﬀected by the increasing number
of tags when more and more users are involved, and depict
the result in Fig. 3(b), in which the x-axis indicates that the
ﬁrst r users’ annotations are used for web page categoriza-
tion. The ﬁgure shows that (1) the categorization accuracy
improves much on the arrival of each new user when the
number of users involved is small, and (2) improves not very

Table 2: The hottest tags in 4 categories
Internet

Programming

java

python
develop

lisp

webdesign

blog
css
ﬂash
design

System
tabletpc

tablet
amiga
sinclair

arm

Security
ﬁrewall
network

vpn
Linux

sysadmin

opensource

867Table 3: Popular web pages in 3 categories and collected by expert users
Category: Opensource
http://sourceforge.net
http://www.mozilla.org
http://www.mozillazine.org

Category: Java
http://www.eclipse.org
http://java.sun.com
http://pmd.sourceforge.net
http://www.lowagie.com/iText
http://www.onjava.com
Expert User of “Java”: t****v
http://java.sun.com
http://ant.apache.org
http://www.eclipse.org
http://pmd.sourceforge.net
http://argouml.tigris.org

Category: Artiﬁcial Intelligence
http://www.agentlink.org/
http://www.aiwisdom.com/
http://bnj.sourceforge.net/
http://www.abelard.org/turpap/turpap.htm http://www.gnu.org
http://www.imagination-engines.com/
Expert User of “Java”: a***o
http://java.sun.com
http://www.eclipse.org
http://pmd.sourceforge.net
http://jakarta.apache.org/cactus
http://argouml.tigris.org

http://www.opensource.org
Expert User of “Java”: s*****3
http://java.sun.com
http://ant.apache.org
http://www.eclipse.org
http://jakarta.apache.org
http://java.sun.com/products/jsp

much and tends to be stable as the number of users increases.
Similar as the conclusion in [3], this observation can be ex-
plained by the fact that the distribution of tags of a speciﬁc
web page tends to be stable during the running of the social
bookmarking systems, e.g., Del.icio.us.

5.2 Case Study on Social Ranking Model

In this experiment, we conduct some case studies to con-
ﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of our social ranking model. Towards
this, we collect a sample of Del.icio.us data consisting of
2,879,614 tags made by 10,109 diﬀerent users on 690,482
diﬀerent web pages which are automatically categorized to
the hierarchical catalog of ODP by our SWD system.

In SWD, when users are browsing information of a par-
ticular category, we will show them the URLs of the most
popular web pages, the hottest tags, and the expert users,
all of which help enrich the description of this category and
can navigate users to ﬁnd the target information more ef-
ﬁciently and conveniently. For example, Table 2 has listed
the top 5 hottest tags of 4 sub-categories in the “Computer”
category, while Table 3 has listed the URLs of the most pop-
ular web pages in of another 3 sub-categories, and the top
URLs collected by 3 expert users of the “Java” sub-category.
From Tables 2 and 3, we can observe that (1) the hottest
tags seem reasonable, these tags (e.g., “tabletpc” for “Sys-
tem” and “css” for “internet” ) summarize the hottest topics
in each domain; (2) the URLs really correspond to authority
web pages in each domain; and (3) the expert users always
bookmark web pages of high qualities in each domain, which
are very helpful for those rookie users who are interested in
this domain. The case study has been also conducted on the
other categories and sub-categories, the conclusion is similar
to the above observation.

6. CONCLUSION

We proposed a framework of novel browsing system called
Social Web Directory (SWD), which can automatically cat-
egorize web pages collected and tagged by every user and
enable them to browse these web pages in an eﬃcient way.
By taking advantages of the well-edited hierarchial catalog
structure in ODP and the social bookmarks in Del.icio.us,
our SWD system can make up the ﬂaws of previous brows-
ing systems, and has the following three characteristics. (1)
The system constructs a web directory automatically with
the help of social bookmarks.
In other words, the main-
tenance of a web directory does not require skilled editors
to pay extensive eﬀorts any more because our SWD system
enables every user to contribute to the web directory and
locate the desired resources easily. (2) The system provides

a ranking list of popular web page in each category. With
this ranking list, users can easily ﬁnd the most useful web
pages in a certain category with much less clicks and content
reviews. (3) The system also supports community-based ex-
ploratory browsing since it oﬀers the hottest tags and expert
users in each category, which enrich the category description
and make the browse of community information easier.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partly supported by the National Key Tech-
nologies R&D Program (Grant No.: 2011BAD21B02), NSFC
61003049, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities (Grant No.: 2012QNA5018, 2013QNA5020), and
the Key Project of ZJU Excellent Young Teacher Fund.

8. REFERENCES
[1] S. Bao, G. Xue, X. Wu, Y. Yu, B. Fei, and Z. Su.

Optimizing web search using social annotations. In
WWW, pages 501–510, 2007.

[2] L. Blanco, N. Dalvi, and A. Machanavajjhala. Highly

eﬃcient algorithms for structural clustering of large
websites. In WWW, pages 437–446, 2011.

[3] H. Halpin, V. Robu, and H. Shepherd. The complex
dynamics of collaborative tagging. In WWW, pages
211–220, 2007.

[4] R. Li, S. Bao, Y. Yu, B. Fei, and Z. Su. Towards

eﬀective browsing of large scale social annotations. In
WWW, pages 943–952, 2007.

[5] G. Marchionini. Exploratory search: From ﬁnding to

understanding. Communications of the ACM,
49(4):41–46, 2006.

[6] C. Olston and E. H. Chi. Scenttrails: Integrating

browsing and searching on the web. ACM Transactions
on Computer-Human Interaction, 10(3):177–197, 2003.

[7] X. Qi and B. D. Davison. Web page classiﬁcation:

Features and algorithms. ACM Computing Surveys,
41(2):12, 2009.

[8] D. Shen, Z. Chen, Q. Yang, H.-J. Zeng, B. Zhang,

Y. Lu, and W.-Y. Ma. Web-page classiﬁcation through
summarization. In SIGIR, pages 242–249, 2004.

[9] Y. Song, L. Zhang, and C. L. Giles. Automatic tag
recommendation algorithms for social recommender
systems. ACM Transactions on the Web, 5(1):4, 2011.
[10] G.-R. Xue, Y. Yu, D. Shen, Q. Yang, H.-J. Zeng, and

Z. Chen. Reinforcing web-object categorization
through interrelationships. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, 12(2-3):229–248, 2006.

868