Who Will Retweet Me? Finding Retweeters in Twitter

Zhunchen Luo†, Miles Osborne‡, Jintao Tang† and Ting Wang†

†College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology

410073, Changsha, Hunan, CHINA

‡School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh

zhunchenluo@nudt.edu.cn, miles@inf.ed.ac.uk, {tangjintao, tingwang}@nudt.edu.cn

EH8 9AB, Edinburgh, UK

ABSTRACT
An important aspect of communication in Twitter (and other
Social Networks) is message propagation – people creating
posts for others to share. Although there has been work on
modelling how tweets in Twitter are propagated (retweeted),
an untackled problem has been who will retweet a message.
Here we consider the task of ﬁnding who will retweet a mes-
sage posted on Twitter. Within a learning-to-rank frame-
work, we explore a wide range of features, such as retweet
history, followers status, followers active time and followers
interests. We ﬁnd that followers who retweeted or mentioned
the author’s tweets frequently before and have common in-
terests are more likely to be retweeters.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
Information Systems [INFORMATION STORAGE AND
RETRIEVAL]: Information Search and Retrieval

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation

Keywords
Retweeter, Twitter, Propagation Analysis

1.

INTRODUCTION

Twitter is a popular microblogging service which attracts
over 500 million registered users and generates over 340 mil-
lion tweets daily1. People not only consume information
but also publish or share opinions or stories themselves. An
interesting mechanism in Twitter is retweeting – re-posting
someone else’s tweet. Most studies in retweeting concentrate
on predicting whether a tweet will be retweeted [5, 13, 1] or
understanding retweeting behavior [11, 4, 18]. However, we
are still largely ignorant about who will retweet a post. We

1en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twitter

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

call such people retweeters. Here, we consider the problem
of ﬁnding retweeters in Twitter.

Modelling who will retweet a post deepens our under-
standing of how information ﬂows in Social Networks. These
factors can be a complex interaction between the message
content itself, the original author and the person who prop-
agates that message. Understanding who will share a post
is of interest to advertisers and media companies. This is
clearly a hard task as much of the information necessary for
prediction is hidden from us, or changes over time.

Here, we treat ﬁnding retweeters as a ranking problem
which retrieves followers retweeting a certain post. We use
a standard machine learning approach to learn a ranking
function for followers that uses a range of features. These
features include: the retweet history of the original author,
the social status of her followers, when they are active and
their interests. We demonstrate that our ranking approach
using all features can achieve MAP signiﬁcantly better than
a random baseline which ranks the followers randomly and
a baseline which ranks followers by the number of times she
retweeted the author’s previous tweets before. In particular,
we ﬁnd that the retweet history and the similarity between
the content of the tweet and the posting times of followers
are most eﬀective for ﬁnding retweeters.

2. RELATED WORK

The popularity of Twitter, easy access to data and the
unique characteristic of retweeting have made it a hot re-
search domain recently. Related work can be divided into
predicting retweets and retweeting behavioral analysis.
2.1 Predicting Retweets

In Twitter, messages deemed important by the community
propagates through retweets. There is much work related to
predicting whether a tweet in general will be retweeted. Suh
et al. [16] ﬁrstly examined a number of features that might
aﬀect retweetability of tweets using a large amount of data.
They found that, amongst content features, URLs and hash-
tags have strong relationships with retweetability. Petro-
vic et al. [13] used a machine learning approach based on
the passive-aggressive algorithm to predict whether a tweet
would be retweeted in the future. They found that the tweet
content, the number of times the author was listed, how
many followers they had and whether the author was veriﬁed
were useful features for this task. Hong et al. [5] proposed a
method to predict whether a tweet would be retweeted and
also estimated the number of times it would be retweeted.
Zaman et al.
[19] used a collaborative ﬁltering approach to

869predict for a pair of users whether a tweet written by one will
be retweeted by the other user. They found that the iden-
tity of the source of the tweet and retweeter were the most
eﬀective features for predicting future retweets. Naveed et
al. [12] trained a prediction model to forecast for a given
tweet its likelihood of being retweeted based on its contents.
They introduced and evaluated a method to determine the
‘interestingness’ of microblog messages. Their experimental
results showed that this interestingness made a message on
Twitter worth retweeting. Artzi et al. [1] proposed a model
for predicting the likelihood of responding which includes
retweeting and replying.
2.2 Retweeting Behavioral Analysis

Moving away from predicting retweets, researchers have
also studied broad characteristics of retweeting. boyd2 et
al. [4] interviewed Twitter users on the reasons why they
retweet, and on what they retweet the most. Yang and
Counts [17] constructed networks based on user name men-
tions when measuring how the network structure aﬀected in-
formation diﬀusion in Twitter. Yang et al. [18] analyzed how
retweeting behaviors was inﬂuenced by factors such post-
ing time. They found that almost 25.5% of tweets posted
by users are actually retweeted from friends who had blogs.
Macskassy and Michelson [10] studied a set of Twitter users
over a period of a month and sought to explain the individual
information diﬀusion behaviors, as represented by retweets.
They found that content based propagation models could
explain the majority of retweet behaviors they saw in their
data. Starbird et al.
[15] examined microblogging infor-
mation diﬀusion activity during the 2011 Egyptian political
uprisings. They demonstrated how remote individuals par-
ticipated in Egypt’s 2011 revolution through low-risk, social
media- enabled activities. Comarela et al. [3] identiﬁed fac-
tors that inﬂuence users’ response or retweet probability.
They found previous response to the tweeter, the tweet-
ers’ sending rate, the freshness of information, the length
of tweet could aﬀect users’ response.

3. METHOD

Given a tweet t from user u and her followers F ollowers(u),
our goal is to learn a function F that estimates the likelihood
of follower fi (fi ∈ F ollower(u)) retweeting t in future. We
treat this as a ranking problem and ﬁnd the top-k followers
who are most likely to retweet a given post. This is because
tweets might be retweeted by variable numbers of people
and potentially we might want to rank them. Note that this
could be treated as a classiﬁcation problem without loss of
generality.

To generate a good function F which ranks F ollowers(u)
according to whether they are likely to be retweeters of a
given post, we investigate a wide range of features. We
develop features in a learning-to-rank scenario [7]. Learning
to rank is a data driven approach which incorporates a set
of features in a model for ranking task [8, 9]. Every follower
fi is tagged whether she retweeted t in training data. This
gives author-follower pairs. From these author-follower pairs
a set of features related to the possibility of being retweeters
is extracted.

2Dana Boyd spells her name in publications with lower case
letters. This is not a typo.

3.1 Features

When retrieving retweeters, we consider the following fea-

ture families:
3.1.1 Retweet History (RH)
Intuitively, some follower fi who retweeted (mentioned) a
user u before is likely to retweet u’s tweets again. We develop
two features: the number of times fi previously retweeted
u’s tweets (called Num fRu) and the number of times fi
mentioned u before (called Num fMu). This captures the
idea that two users may talk to each other and so may be
more inclined to propagate posts in the future. We also
consider the situation when two users mutually repost each
other. We count the number of times u retweeted and men-
tioned fi’s tweets before (called Num uRf and Num uMf
respectively) as two other features for our task. Finally,
some people (often spammers) only repost other people’s
information and hardly post original texts. We use the ratio
of a follower’s tweets which are retweets (or contain men-
tion ‘@’), called Ratio retweet (Ratio mention), as two
features.
3.1.2 Follower Status (FS)
Information propagation is often from higher status3 users
to lower status users [2]. We randomly investigated more
than 100,000 retweets and found only 38.8% of retweets
are from users posting fewer tweets to users posting more
tweets; only 23.8% of retweets are posted from users contain-
ing fewer followers to users containing more followers; only
0.04% retweets are from unveriﬁed users to veriﬁed users.
These statistics show that users with diﬀerent social status
have diﬀerent retweeting behavior. We include this infor-
mation as follows: the number of tweets user fi has ever
written (called Posts), the number of followers user fi has
(called Followers), the number of friends user fi has (called
Friend), the times user fi has been listed (called Listed)
and whether fi is veriﬁed (called Veriﬁed).
3.1.3 Follower Active Time (FAT)
Twitter users do not often interact with other users (very)
late at night. Furthermore, posts made late at night are of-
ten not seen by other users the next day due to them being
replaced by more recent tweets4. To explore this statement,
we considered which time users actually replied to other
users. After randomly sampling 10,000 tweets that were
replies, we found that only 12.4% of users replied to tweets
between the hours of 00:00 and 06:00.

We model this information using two features. The ﬁrst
captures when two users are in the same timezone (called
Timezone). We use the proportion of fi’s tweets posted
before which were in the same hour interval to the tweet
t’s posting time as another feature called PostTimeCon-
sis. This feature could capture the consistency of follower’s
posting time habit to t’s posting time.
3.1.4 Follower Interests (FI)
A follower retweeting a tweet might indicate some con-
nection between the two people; for example, they might
share common interests (“we both love cats”), be having an
oﬀ-line relationship etc. This information can be a valu-
able hint when ﬁnding retweeters. We present a similarity
3Where status could mean a celebrity.
4For example, Twitter only displays the most recent posts.

870model to capture shared interests and represent the user fi’s
previous tweets as a simple weighted bag-of-word of terms
(based on Tﬁdf score). We can then compute a cosine an-
gle between the user fi’s previous tweets and the tweet t
(based on vector space model [14]). We call this feature the
SimInterest. When calculating the value of feature Sim-
Interest, for each pairs of tweet t and follower fi’s previous
tweets, we ﬁltered the top 100 high frequent words and the
words which appear less than 5 times in more than 6 millions
tweets in our collected data.

4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Dataset and Experimental setting

To the best of our knowledge, there is no annotated dataset
of retweeters in Twitter. Therefore, we created a new dataset
for this task5. We randomly selected 500 English tweets
which had been retweeted at least once by the respective
author followers. Tweet posting times were from Septem-
ber 14th, 2012 to October 1st, 2012. Since retweeting is
time sensitive (half of retweeting occur within an hour, and
75% of retweeting under a day [6]) we rechecked these tweets
again after one day to investigate which followers retweeted
the original tweet. Due to time limitation of the Twitter
API and the large number of followers for popular users,
it is infeasible for us to collect all follower information for
each author. Therefore, we only collected 100 recent new
followers from all the followers of tweet authors. We also
collected 200 recent tweets of each follower. As previously
explained, we assigned a binary label to every follower indi-
cating whether they retweeted a post. Note that some users
may not be available due to privacy concerns preventing us
from achieving total recall. Importantly, because we do not
exhaustively collect all follower information for each user, it
is possible that a tweet is retweeted by a user that we do
not have information for. This will also reduce overall recall.
Summary statistics of the data are listed in Table 1.

Total tweets which have been retweeted
Average number of followers per tweet
Total retweeters
Total non-retweeters

500
81.15
257
40317

Table 1: Retweeters Data Statistics

We use SVMRank when training our author retrieval model6.

We use a linear kernel for training and report results for the
best setting of parameters.
In order to avoid overﬁtting
the data we perform 10-fold cross-validation in our dataset.
There are several metrics that can be used to measure the
performance of ranking. In this paper, we use Mean Average
Precision (MAP) as the evaluation metric.
4.2 Results

4.2.1 Baselines
We choose two baselines. The ﬁrst one simply ranks fol-
lowers randomly and we call it Random. For the second

5This dataset is available at https://sourceforge.net/
projects/retweeter/
6http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/tj/svm_light/
svm_rank.html

baseline, we note that followers who previously had a his-
tory of retweeting might do this in the future. Therefore, we
ranks followers by the number of times they retweeted the
author’s previous tweets before (called RPT ).
4.2.2 Retrieval Performance
Our ranking methods use diﬀerent feature families: Retweet

History, Follower Status, Follower Active Time and
Follower Interests (called RH, FS, FAT and FI respec-
tively).

Table 2 shows retrieval performance according to which
family of related features we use. The main result is that
user similarity (Follower Interest, FI) is the most beneﬁcial
information source, followed by retweeting history (RH) and
then social status of followers (Follower Status, FS). Infor-
mation about active time of the follower is not useful for this
task. Finally, using all feature families together (called All )
achieves the best performance, improving MAP by 301.4%
over the Random and 25.6% over the PRT.

Next we consider in detail the eﬀect of individual features
when ﬁnding retweeters in Twitter. Table 3 shows the re-
sults using individual features when ranking7. We can see
that all the ranking methods based on the features from
Retweet History feature family yield signiﬁcant improve
this task. We also found the feature PostTimeConsis
helps. Additionally, the eﬀectiveness of SimInterest shows
most users retweet another user’s posts based on content.
4.2.3 Examples
Here is an example showing the usefulness of user retweet

history:

We are having a bake sale today in the Student Union from
11-2! Come buy a midday snack from the Pretty Poo-
dles!

The author of this tweet was retweeted by a follower who
retweeted or mentioned the author’s tweets 30 times totally
in previous tweets. Our RH model ranks this follower in ﬁrst
place.

Here is another example showing the usefulness of user

interest similarity:

Excited to announce our debut London show. Full details

here - http: // t. co/ P60Wc3Lj

The author of this tweet has a follower who retweeted this
post and in turn had posted often about music and perfor-
mance as shown in previous tweets. This follower was ranked
higher by the FI model.

5. CONCLUSION

Finding retweeters in Twitter can help deliver informa-
tion to other people more eﬃciently and eﬀectively. This is
a new task and our results will open the way for follow-up re-
search better understanding how Social Media works. In our
work we ﬁnd the historical retweeting records of author and
followers, the followers’ status and the similarity between
the content of the tweet and followers’ previous tweets are
eﬀective information for this task.
7The MAP results of PRT and Num fRu ranking models
are diﬀerent, since we use the weight of feature Num fRu
for PRT to rank followers directly and take this as a feature
for learning to rank in Num fRu model.

871MAP(%)

Random 2.17
PRT
6.93
6.27∗
RH
3.66∗
FS

MAP(%)
FAT 2.91
8.12∗
FI
8.71∗†
All

Table 2: Performance of Ranking Methods for Finding Retweeters based on Diﬀerent Feature Family. A
signiﬁcant improvement over the Random ranking method and PRT ranking method with a star (∗) and a
dagger (†) respectively (p < 0.05).

Random
PRT
Num fRu
Num fMu
Num uRf
Num uMf
Retweet Ratio
Mention Ratio

MAP(%)
2.17
6.93
6.83∗
7.08∗
6.20∗
7.62∗
4.45∗
3.05∗

Posts
Followers
Friends
Listed
Veriﬁed
Timezone
PostTimeConsis
SimInterest

MAP(%)
3.79∗
2.37
2.03
2.17
2.34
2.37
2.86∗
8.12∗

Table 3: Performance of Ranking Methods for Finding Retweeters based on Diﬀerent Feature Alone. A
signiﬁcant improvement over the Random ranking method and PRT ranking method with a star (∗) and a
dagger (†) respectively (p < 0.05).

In the future our work is using new features to improve
the performance of ﬁnding retweeters. These may include
whether the intimate friends of follower retweet the certain
tweet, whether the location information of the tweets aﬀects
the followers, etc.

Acknowledgements
The research is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61170156, 61202337 and
60933005).

6. REFERENCES
[1] Y. Artzi, P. Pantel, and M. Gamon. Predicting

responses to microblog posts. In HLT-NAACL, pages
602–606, 2012.

[2] M. Cha, A. Mislove, and P. K. Gummadi. A
measurement-driven analysis of information
propagation in the ﬂickr social network. In WWW,
pages 721–730, 2009.

[3] G. Comarela, M. Crovella, V. Almeida, and

F. Benevenuto. Understanding factors that aﬀect
response rates in twitter. In HT, pages 123–132, New
York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.

[4] danah boyd, S. Golder, and G. Lotan. Tweet, tweet,

retweet: Conversational aspects of retweeting on
twitter. In HICSS, pages 1–10, 2010.

[5] L. Hong, O. Dan, and B. D. Davison. Predicting

popular messages in twitter. In WWW (Companion
Volume), pages 57–58, 2011.

[6] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon. What is

twitter, a social network or a news media? In WWW,
pages 591–600, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.

[7] T.-Y. Liu. Learning to rank for information retrieval.

Found. Trends Inf. Retr., 3(3):225–331, Mar. 2009.

[8] Z. Luo, M. Osborne, S. Petrovic, and T. Wang.

Improving twitter retrieval by exploiting structural
information. In AAAI, 2012.

[9] Z. Luo, M. Osborne, and T. Wang. Opinion retrieval

in twitter. In ICWSM, 2012.

[10] S. A. Macskassy and M. Michelson. Why do people
retweet? anti-homophily wins the day! In ICWSM,
2011.

[11] M. Nagarajan, H. Purohit, and A. P. Sheth. A

qualitative examination of topical tweet and retweet
practices. In ICWSM, 2010.

[12] N. Naveed, T. Gottron, J. Kunegis, and A. C. Alhadi.

Bad news travel fast: A content-based analysis of
interestingness on twitter. In WebSci, 2011.

[13] S. Petrovic, M. Osborne, and V. Lavrenko. Rt to win!
predicting message propagation in twitter. In ICWSM,
2011.

[14] G. Salton, A. Wong, and C. Yang. A vector space

model for automatic indexing. Communications of the
ACM, 18(11):613–620, 1975.

[15] K. Starbird, L. Palen, and L. Palen. (how) will the
revolution be retweeted?: information diﬀusion and
the 2011 egyptian uprising. In CSCW, pages 7–16,
2012.

[16] B. Suh, L. Hong, P. Pirolli, and E. H. Chi. Want to be

retweeted? large scale analytics on factors impacting
retweet in twitter network. In SocialCom/PASSAT,
pages 177–184, 2010.

[17] J. Yang and S. Counts. Predicting the speed, scale,

and range of information diﬀusion in twitter. In
ICWSM, 2010.

[18] Z. Yang, J. Guo, K. Cai, J. Tang, J. Li, L. Zhang, and

Z. Su. Understanding retweeting behaviors in social
networks. In CIKM, pages 1633–1636, 2010.

[19] T. Zaman, R. Herbrich, J. Van Gael, and D. Stern.

Predicting information spreading in twitter. In
Workshop on Computational Social Science and the
Wisdom of Crowds, NIPS, pages 599–601, 2010.

872