Mining Web Search Topics With Diverse

Spatiotemporal Patterns

Department of Computer Science and Engineering

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China

Di Jiang, Wilfred Ng

{dijiang, wilfred}@cse.ust.hk

ABSTRACT
Mining the latent topics from web search data and capturing their
spatiotemporal patterns have many applications in information re-
trieval. As web search is heavily inﬂuenced by the spatial and tem-
poral factors, the latent topics usually demonstrate a variety of spa-
tiotemporal patterns. In the face of the diversity of these patterns,
existing models are increasingly ineffective, since they capture only
one dimension of the spatiotemporal patterns (either the spatial or
temporal dimension) or simply assume that there exists only one
kind of spatiotemporal patterns. Such oversimpliﬁcation risks dis-
torting the latent data structure and hindering the downstream usage
of the discovered topics. In this paper, we introduce the Spatiotem-
poral Search Topic Model (SSTM) to discover the latent topics
from web search data with capturing their diverse spatiotemporal
patterns simultaneously. The SSTM can ﬂexibly support diverse
spatiotemporal patterns and seamlessly integrate the unique fea-
tures in web search such as query words, URLs, timestamps and
search sessions. The SSTM is demonstrated as an effective ex-
ploratory tool for large-scale web search data and it performs supe-
riorly in quantitative comparisons to several state-of-the-art topic
models.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Search process

General Terms
Algorithms, Experimentation

Keywords
Spatiotemporal, Search Engine, Query Log

1.

INTRODUCTION

With the rapid growth of web search data, there is a great demand
for developing effective text mining models to analyze search en-
gine query log, since discovering the web search topics and captur-
ing their spatiotemporal patterns are vital for applications such as

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM or the author must be honored. To
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

Google Trends1 and Foursquare [11]. However, little work has been
done on analyzing query log from the spatiotemporal perspective.
Although some admixture topic models [2] have been proposed
to accommodate the demands of analyzing timestamped or GPS-
labeled data, to the best of our knowledge, none of them supports
discovering topics by considering different spatiotemporal patterns
simultaneously. However, in the ﬁeld of query log analysis, it is
critical to model the existence of diverse spatiotemporal patterns.
For instance, a topic about Terrorism may widely exist from the
spatial perspective and lasts for a long time period from the tem-
poral perspective. In contrast, a topic about Storm Sandy may be
primarily related to the coastal regions of the United States and has
a relatively short longevity. Besides the existence of diverse spa-
tiotemporal patterns, query log data have some unique features such
as query words, URLs, timestamps, search sessions, etc. These in-
formation should be seamlessly integrated for discovering the web
search topics from query log.

To handle the aforementioned challenges, we propose the Spa-
tiotemporal Search Topic Model (SSTM) to discover the latent top-
ics from query log and capture their diverse spatiotemporal pat-
terns simultaneously. To the best of our knowledge, the SSTM is
the ﬁrst model that accommodates a variety of spatiotemporal pat-
terns in a uniﬁed fashion. We carry out large-scale experiments and
the experimental results show that the SSTM outperforms several
state-of-the-arts in terms of perplexity as well as in the tasks such
as location prediction and time predication. The remainder of the
paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work is re-
viewed. Section 3 discusses the spatiotemporal patterns. Section
4 presents the SSTM and details its parameter inference method.
Section 5 presents experimental results, and conclusions are pro-
vided in Section 6.

2. RELATED WORK

We review some recent related work in this section.

In [1], a
framework for quantifying the spatial variation of search queries is
developed on complete Yahoo query log. The Topic-Over-Time
model [14] is proposed to associate each topic with a continu-
ous distribution over timestamps.
In [4], the authors proposed a
model for the monitoring topic and vocabulary evolution over doc-
uments. In [16], LPTA is proposed to exploit the periodicity of the
terms as well as term co-occurrences. Wang et al. [13] proposed
a topic model to capture the relationships between locations and
words in news and blogs. Yin et al. [15] studied the problem of
discovering geographic topics from GPS-associated tweets. Sizov
et al. [12] proposed models for characterization of social media
by combining text features with spatial knowledge. Eisenstein et

1http://www.google.com/trends/

881al. [3] proposed a multi-level generative model that reasons about
lexical variation across different geographic regions. Hao et al. [5]
proposed the location-topic model to mine location-representative
knowledge from a collection of travelogues. Hong et al. [6] pre-
sented an algorithm by modeling diversity in tweets based on topi-
cal diversity, geographical diversity, and an interest distribution of
the user. In [10], a probabilistic approach is proposed to model the
subtopic themes and spatiotemporal theme patterns simultaneously.
With the popularity of applying topic modeling to spatial, tempo-
ral or even spatiotemporal information, few prior work has been
done on analyzing web search data by jointly modeling diverse spa-
tiotemporal patterns. Hence, the major distinction of the proposed
SSTM is its capability of discovering web search topics while cap-
turing their diverse spatiotemporal patterns simultaneously.

3. SPATIOTEMPORAL PATTERNS

In this section, we review the spatial temporal patterns that are
used in existing work. The existing spatial patterns can be broadly
divided into two categories: the local pattern (Sl) and the global
pattern (Sg) [12, 13]. The logic behind this categorization is that
some topics demonstrate geographic locality while the others do
not. Speciﬁcally, Sg assumes that each topic is related to some
locations and the geographic distance between the locations is not
considered while Sl assumes that topics have geographic locality
and each topic is related to a speciﬁc area on the map. The exist-
ing temporal patterns can be broadly classiﬁed into three types: the
periodic pattern (Tp), the background pattern (Tg) and the bursty
pattern (Tb) [8, 16]. A periodic topic is one that repeats in regu-
lar intervals; a background topic is one covered uniformly over the
entire period; a bursty topic is a transient topic that is intensively
covered only in a certain time period. We now present the spa-
tiotemporal patterns that will be used in this paper. Assume that we
have the spatial pattern set S and the temporal pattern set T from
the existing work, we create a set of spatiotemporal patterns P by
applying the Cartesian product on S and T . In this way, we get
very diverse spatiotemporal patterns, which are presented in Table
1. Note that the spatiotemporal pattern proposed in [10] is captured
by p2 in Table 1.

Table 1: Spatiotemporal Patterns

ID
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6

Pattern
(Sg, Tg)
(Sg, Tb)
(Sg, Tp)
(Sl, Tg)
(Sl, Tb)
(Sl, Tp)

Description

global-background pattern

global-bursty pattern
global-periodic pattern
local-background pattern

local-bursty pattern
local-periodic pattern

4. SPATIOTEMPORAL SEARCH

TOPIC MODEL

4.1 Description of SSTM

We represent each query log entry in a format as follows:

{uid, w, t, (l, llat, llon)?, u?}

Here uid is the user identiﬁer, w is the word vector for the query,
t is the timestamp of the query, (l, llat, llon)? is a vector of triplets
where l is the names of the locations, llat and llon represent the
latitudes and longitudes of the corresponding locations, u? is the

clicked URLs of this query. The location information is not readily
available in query log, we employ the method in [9] to extract the
locations l and obtain the latitudes llat and longitudes llon of the
locations via a geographic dictionary. The question mark indicates
that the corresponding element may not exist for some log entries.
In web search, the queries are not independent from each other.
The users usually submit search queries consecutively as a session
to satisfy a single information need. We utilize the method in [7]
to segment query log into search sessions. Finally, we group each
user’s log entries together as a document and then organize each
document via sessions.

The generative story of SSTM is presented in Algorithm 1. We
assume that each user has a topic distribution and each topic is re-
lated to a speciﬁc spatiotemporal pattern. When conducing web
search to satisfy an information need, the user ﬁrst decides the topic
and then selects some query words according to the chosen topic.
For each search session, the user needs to decide whether to click
some URLs. If so, the clicked URLs are generated according to
the chosen topic as well. Since the information within a session
is coherent and is used to satisfy the same information need, we
constrain that the information in the same session shares the same
topic. Finally, the spatiotemporal information such as the times-
tamps and the locations (or the latitudes and longitudes) is gener-
ated based on the spatiotemporal pattern of the chosen topic.

draw a query word distribution φk ∼ Dirichlet(β);
draw a URL distribution Ωk ∼ Dirichlet(δ);

Algorithm 1 Generative Procedure of SSTM
1: for topic k ∈ 1, ..., K do
2:
3:
4: end for
5: for each document d ∈ 1, ..., D do
draw d’s topic distribution θd ∼ Dirichlet(α);
6:
7:
for each search session s in d do
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18: end for

generate URLs u ∼ Multinomial(Ωz );
(cid:2)
end if
generate the temporal information t ∼ p
t|z);
if Ys = 1 then
generate the spatial information l ∼ p(l|z);

choose a topic z ∼ Multinomial(θd );
generate query words w ∼ Multinomial(φz );
if Xs = 1 then

end if
end for

4.2 Parameter Inference

We proceed to discuss a sampling method for the parameter in-
ference of SSTM. The joint likelihood of the observed query words,
the URLs and the spatiotemporal information with the hyperparam-
eters is listed as follows:

P (w, u, t, l, z|α, β, δ, X, Y) =
P (u|z, δ,X )P (w|z, β)P (l|z, Y)P (t|z)P (z|α).

(1)

The probability of generating the query words w in the corpus is
given as follows:

(cid:3) D(cid:4)

Sd(cid:4)

Ws(cid:4)

P (w|z, β) =

P (φz|β)dΦ.
(2)
The probability of generating the URLs u in the corpus is given as

P (wdsi|φzds )Ndstdsi

d=1

z=1

s=1

i=1

K(cid:4)

882follows:
(cid:3) D(cid:4)

Sd(cid:4)

{Uds(cid:4)

P (u|z, δ, X) =
K(cid:4)

s=1

d=1

P (udsi|Ωzds )Ndsudsi }I(Xds=1)

P (Ωz|δ)dΩ.
(3)
The conditional probability of generating the temporal information
t given the topic z can be written as:

z=1

i=1

p(t|z) = p(I T
z = 1)p(cid:2)(cid:2)(t|z) + p(I T

z = 0)p(cid:2)(t|z)+
z = 2)p(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(t|z),

p(I T

where

⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

p(cid:2)(t|z) =

p(cid:2)(cid:2)(t|z) =
p(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(t|z) =

1

,

te − ts
1√
(cid:6)
2πσz

− (t−μz )2

e

σ2
z

,
p(t|z, n)p(n).

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

n

The background pattern p(cid:2)(t|z) is modeled by a uniform distribu-
tion. In p(cid:2)(t|z), te and ts are the newest and the oldest timestamps
in the query log. The bursty pattern p(cid:2)(cid:2)(t|z) is modeled by a Gaus-
sian distribution. The periodic pattern p(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(t|z) is modeled as a
mixture of Gaussian distributions. In p(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(t|z), n is the period id,
p(t|z, n) = 1√
and p(n) is uniform in terms of
n.
The conditional probability of generating the spatial information l
given the topic z can be written as:

− (t− ˆμz −nT )2

2π ˆσz

ˆσ2
z

e

p(l|z) = p(I L

z = 0)p(cid:2)(l|z) + p(I L

z = 1)p(cid:2)(cid:2)(l|z).

(8)

If topic z is a global pattern, we model that spatial information
If topic z is a
by a Multinomial distribution over the locations.
local pattern, we model the spatial information as a 2-dimensional
Gaussian distribution over the latitude and longitude:

p(cid:2)(cid:2)(l|z) =

−2r

√

e

1 − r2

1
2πσlat
z σlon
(llat − μlat
z )(llon − μlon
σlat
z σlon

z

z

z

(llat − μlat
z )2

1

2(1−r2 ) [

)

+

2

σlat
(llon − μlon

z

z
2

σlon

z

(9)

)2

].

After combining the aforementioned formula terms, applying Bayes
rule and folding terms into the proportionality constant, the condi-
tional probability of assigning the kth topic for the ith session can
be determined by a set of formulas. For instance, if the topic k is
related to the spatiotemporal pattern p1 in Table 1, the conditional
probability is deﬁned as follows:

P (zi = k, I

L

k = 0|z−i, w, u, t, l, X, Y) ∝

T
k = 0, I
CDK

(cid:2)K

dk + αk

k(cid:3) =1

CDK
dk(cid:3) + α

T(cid:3)

1

tend − tstart

j=1

k(cid:3)
Γ(CKW

kw + βw + Niw )
Γ(CKW

+ βw )

kw

(10)

(cid:2)W

Γ(
(cid:2)W
w=1(CKW
kw

w=1(CKW

kw + βw ))

Wi(cid:3)

+ βw + Niw ))

w=1

Γ(
(cid:2)U

(cid:4)

Γ(

u=1(CKU

Γ(
(cid:2)U
u=1(CKU
ku
l=1(CKL
(CKL

Γ(
(cid:2)L

(cid:2)L

Γ(

l=1

kl

(cid:4)

ku + δu ))
+ δu + Niu))

Ui(cid:3)

u=1

Γ(CKU

ku + δu + Niu)
Γ(CKU
ku

+ δu)

kl + λl))
+ λl + Nil))

Li(cid:3)

l=1

Γ(CKL

kl + λl + Nil)
Γ(CKL

+ λl)

kl

(cid:5)I(Xi =1)

(cid:5)I(Yi =1)

,

where C DK
is the number of sessions that have been assigned to
dk
topic k in document d, C KW
kw is the number of query words that
have been assigned to topic k, C KU
ku is the number of URLs that
have been assigned to topic k, Niw is the number of w in the ith
session and Niu is the number of u in the ith session. Similarly, we
can derive the remaining conditional probabilities when the corre-
sponding topic is related to other spatiotemporal patterns such as
p2, p3, ..., p6. For the sake of simplicity and efﬁciency, we update
the distribution parameters of the bursty pattern, the periodic pat-
tern and the local pattern after each iteration of the sampling pro-
cedure. For example, we update the Gaussian distribution of the
bursty pattern by the sample mean and sample variance as follows:

n(cid:5)

i=1

ti,

1
n

n(cid:5)

μz =

(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:8) 1

n

i=1

σz =

(ti − μz)2,

(11)

(12)

where ti is the ith timestamp which exists in sessions that are as-
signed search topic z. The update formulas for other spatiotempo-
ral patterns can be straightforwardly obtained in a similar way.

5. EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we evaluate the SSTM on the query log of a ma-
jor commercial search engine in the United States. The dataset
contains 1,200,945 search queries that were submitted by 10,213
users. After carrying out the session derivation process, we obtain
520,131 search sessions.
5.1 Perplexity Comparison

We ﬁrst evaluate SSTM by the quantitative metric of perplexity.
The baselines we choose are summarized as follows: Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) [2], Topics-Over-Time model (TOT)[14], Lo-
cation Aware Topic Model (LATM)[13], Geodata in Folksonomies
(GeoFolk)[12], Spatiotemporal Theme Pattern model (STTP) [10]
and Latent Periodic Topic Analysis (LPTA)[16]. Perplexity mea-
sures the ability of a model to generalize to unseen data and better
generalization performance is indicated by a lower perplexity. We
compare the models by a ten-fold cross validation. Figure 1(a) il-
lustrates the average perplexity for each model when the number of
topics is set to different values. We can see that the STTM provides
signiﬁcantly better ﬁt for the data than the baselines. For instance,
when the number of topics is 600, the perplexity of LDA, TOT,
LATM, GeoFolk, STTP and LPTA are 14220, 9986, 9601, 9072,
5569 and 6401 while the perplexity of SSTM is 1423.
5.2 Location Prediction

Geographical locations can be used to predict users’ behaviors
and uncover users’ interests and therefore it is potentially invalu-
able for many perspectives, such as behavior targeting and online
advertisements. In this subsection, we focus on the task of location
prediction. Our goal is to predict the location for a new search ses-
sion based on the words and URLs in the session and the user’s in-
formation. In this experiment, we ﬁlter out the original geographic
information from each session and the original geographic infor-
mation is utilized as the ground truth. For each new session, we
predict its location as ˆld. We calculate the Euclidean distance be-
tween the predicted value and the ground truth locations and aver-
age them over the whole test set. For all the models, we adopt a
ten-fold cross validation setting and the numbers reported here are
averaged across different folds. The experimental result is shown
in Figure 1(b). We can see that LATM and GeoFolk demonstrate

883(a) Perplexity Comparison

(b) Location Prediction

(c) Time Prediction

Figure 1: Experimental Results

relatively high error because they only captures the spatial informa-
tion. By considering both the spatial and the temporal information,
STTP achieves better performance in location prediction, although
it only captures one kind of spatiotemporal pattern. By capturing
the diverse spatiotemporal patterns, SSTM further reduces the error
of location prediction. For instance, when the number of topics is
1000, the error of LATM, GeoFolk and STTP are 154km, 132km
and 121km while the error of SSTM is 110km.
5.3 Time Prediction

Another interesting feature of SSTM is the capability of predict-
ing the timestamps given the textual information in a search ses-
sion. This task also provides another opportunity to quantitatively
compare SSTM against the models that capture the temporal infor-
mation such as TOT, STTP and LPTA. We measure their ability
of predicting the date given the query terms in a session. We use
5,000 held-out search sessions as the evaluation data and then eval-
uate each model’s ability to predict the date of a search session. The
result is presented in Figure 1(c). SSTM demonstrates the highest
date prediction accuracy. For example, when the number of topics
is set to 1000. The error of SSTM is 7.73 days while those of TOT,
STTP and LPTA are 14.87, 13.26 and 13.97 days.

6. CONCLUSION

Search engine query log usually has a mixture of latent topics,
which exhibit diverse spatiotemporal patterns. Discovering the la-
tent topics from query log and capturing their spatiotemporal pat-
terns are critical for many applications in information retrieval.
In this paper, we develop the Spatiotemporal Search Topic Model
(SSTM), which explains the generation of web search topics and a
variety of spatiotemporal patterns simultaneously. We evaluate the
SSTM against several strong baselines on a commercial search en-
gine query log. Experimental results show that the SSTM provides
better ﬁt for the latent structure of query log data. We also demon-
strate that SSTM can serve as the basis for higher level tasks, such
as predicting the location and time of web search behaviors. In fu-
ture work, we plan to apply the SSTM for applications such as user
proﬁling and personalized spatiotemporal web search.

7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is partially supported by RGC GRF under grant num-
ber HKUST 617610. We also wish to thank the anonymous review-
ers for their comments.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Lars Backstrom, Jon Kleinberg, Ravi Kumar, and Jasmine
Novak, Spatial variation in search engine queries, WWW,
2008.

[2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, Latent dirichlet

allocation, JMLR (2003).

[3] J. Eisenstein, B. O’Connor, N. A. Smith, and E. P. Xing, A

latent variable model for geographic lexical variation,
EMNLP, 2010.

[4] A. Gohr, A. Hinneburg, R. Schult, and M. Spiliopoulou,

Topic evolution in a stream of documents, 2009.

[5] Q. Hao, R. Cai, C. Wang, R. Xiao, J. M. Yang, Y. Pang, and

L. Zhang, Equip tourists with knowledge mined from
travelogues, WWW, 2010.

[6] L. Hong, A. Ahmed, S. Gurumurthy, A.J. Smola, and

K. Tsioutsiouliklis, Discovering geographical topics in the
twitter stream, WWW, 2012.

[7] Di Jiang, Kenneth Wai-Ting Leung, and Wilfred Ng,
Context-aware search personalization with concept
preference, CIKM, 2011.

[8] Di Jiang, Kenneth Wai-Ting Leung, Wilfred Ng, and Hao Li,
Beyond click graph: Topic modeling for search engine query
log analysis, DASFAA, 2013.

[9] Di Jiang, Jan Vosecky, Kenneth Wai-Ting Leung, and

Wilfred Ng, G-wstd: a framework for geographic web search
topic discovery, CIKM, 2012.

[10] Q. Mei, C. Liu, H. Su, and C.X. Zhai, A probabilistic
approach to spatiotemporal theme pattern mining on
weblogs, WWW, 2006.

[11] Blake Shaw, Jon Shea, Siddhartha Sinha, and Andrew

Hogue, Learning to rank for spatiotemporal search, WSDM,
2013.

[12] S. Sizov, Geofolk: latent spatial semantics in web 2.0 social

media, WSDM, 2010.

[13] C. Wang, J. Wang, X. Xie, and W. Y. Ma, Mining geographic

knowledge using location aware topic model, GIR, 2007.

[14] X. Wang and A. McCallum, Topics over time: a non-markov

continuous-time model of topical trends, SIGKDD, 2006.

[15] Z. Yin, L. Cao, J. Han, C. Zhai, and T. Huang, Geographical

topic discovery and comparison, WWW, 2011.

[16] Z. Yin, L. Cao, J. Han, C. Zhai, and T. Huang, Lpta: A

probabilistic model for latent periodic topic analysis, ICDM,
2011.

884