Characterizing Stages of a Multi-session Complex Search

Task through Direct and Indirect Query Modiﬁcations

Centrum Wiskunde en

Informatica

Science Park 123, 1098XG
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Jiyin He

j.he@cwi.nl

Marc Bron

University of Amsterdam
Science Park 107, 1098XG
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

m.m.bron@uva.nl

Arjen de Vries

Centrum Wiskunde en

Informatica

Science Park 123, 1098XG
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
arjen.de.vries@cwi.nl

ABSTRACT
Search systems use context to effectively satisfy a user’s informa-
tion need as expressed by a query. Tasks are important factors
in determining user context during search and many studies have
been conducted that identify tasks and task stages through users’
interaction behavior with search systems. The type of interaction
available to users, however, depends on the type of search interface
features available. Queries are the most pervasive input from users
to express their information need regardless of the input method,
e.g., typing keywords or clicking facets.
Instead of characteriz-
ing interaction behavior in terms of interface speciﬁc components,
we propose to characterize users’ search behavior in terms of two
types of query modiﬁcation: (i) direct modiﬁcation, which refers
to reformulations of queries; and (ii) indirect modiﬁcation, which
refers to user operations on additional input components provided
by various search interfaces. We investigate the utility of character-
izing task stages through direct and indirect query reformulations
in a case study and ﬁnd that it is possible to effectively differentiate
subsequent stages of the search task. We found that describing user
interaction behavior in such a generic form allowed us to relate user
actions to search task stages independent from the speciﬁc search
interface deployed. The next step will then be to validate this idea
in a setting with a wider palette of search tasks and tools.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: H.3.3 Information Search
and Retrieval; H.5.2 User Interfaces (Evaluation/methodology)

Keywords
Query modiﬁcation, multi-session task

1.

INTRODUCTION

In order to effectively satisfy users’ information needs as ex-
pressed by a query, search systems use context [9]. Many forms of
context exist, including previous queries issued and users’ interac-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

tions with search systems. To correctly interpret contextual signals
it is important to determine the underlying factors causing these sig-
nals. One salient factor that determines the context of a user is the
task type and task stage in which the user is engaged [3]. Tasks can
range from simple factual search to complex multi-session search
tasks and can consist of single or multiple stages [8]. The interac-
tion of the user with the search system may change depending on
task type and task stage. For example, Vakkari et al. [12] found that
students’ term addition and removal behavior changes during var-
ious stages of a research project. For difﬁcult tasks, studies found
that users tend to formulate more diverse queries and use more ad-
vanced query operators [2, 6]. In exploratory search tasks, users
prefer more advanced interface features such as facets and compar-
isons [7, 13]. Work on aggregated search interfaces found that users
have a tendency to click on results from more and more diverse
facets in complex tasks [1, 11]. Independently each of these stud-
ies contributes to our understanding of user interaction with various
types of systems across different tasks and stages. The interaction
patterns discovered, however, depend on the type of system used in
the study, e.g., a web search engine provides less interface features
for interaction than an exploratory search system.

Queries are the most pervasive input from users to express their
information need regardless of the input method, e.g., submitting a
query by typing keywords in a search box or modifying a query by
clicking a facet. Therefore, users’ queries and the associated query
formulation behavior provide a consistent feature to determine task
type and stage. We propose to characterize users’ search behavior
in terms of two types of query modiﬁcation: (i) direct modiﬁcation,
which refers to reformulations of queries, such as adding, remov-
ing or substituting terms in consecutive queries; and (ii) indirect
modiﬁcation, which refers to user operations on additional input
components provided by various search interfaces such as using
ﬁlters, and switching between collections.

We report on a case study that investigates how users’ search be-
havior changes throughout different stages of their search task. We
focus on two types of search behavior, “exploration” and “focused
search”, and how these behaviors are reﬂected in users’ interaction
with a system in terms of direct as well as indirect query modiﬁ-
cations. We follow 25 students during a four week project. We
provide students with an interface that provides various interface
options, e.g., facets, verticals, and aggregated display. The research
project represents a complex search task spanning multiple sessions
and stages. We conﬁrm empirically that subjects exhibit different
query modiﬁcation patterns during the various stages of the task.

Our contribution is a demonstration of the effectiveness of using
direct and indirect query modiﬁcations as a way of characterizing
different stages of a complex multi-session search task. The ben-

897stage

#switch_screen

#switch_collection

#ﬁlter

1
2
3

46
30
28

71
94
81

44
37
52

Table 1: Cross-tabulation of the number of times an interface
feature is used for each stage of the research project.

aggregated search display. In this display all collections are shown
simultaneously. Results for each collection are horizontally ori-
entated and the vertical order of the six collections is ﬁxed. The
“Similarity Search” has the same layout as the aggregated display
and provides a ﬁnd-similar feature [10]. By clicking on a docu-
ment the user submits the current query and the ﬁrst 100 words of
the clicked document as an OR query.
Subjects.
In total 25 postgraduate students Media Studies par-
ticipated. The sample consists of 12 men and 13 women, aged
in terms of median (MD) and interquartile range (IQR) around 23
years (MD=23, IQR=22-24). We asked subjects background ques-
tions using a 5 point Likert-type scale, where a one indicates no
agreement and a ﬁve indicates extreme agreement. Subjects re-
ported high levels of experience in general computer use (MD=4,
IQR=4-5) and using online search tools (MD=4, IQR=4-5).
Log data. We record all queries submitted to the system and any
components clicked by the subjects: switch screen; change collec-
tion; check/uncheck ﬁlter; paginate; view document; and bookmark
document. The switch screen and change collection actions resub-
mit a query to the system if the user has already provided one dur-
ing the session, while the ﬁlter actions modify a query by adding
or removing a term. Due to the limited number of “ﬁnd similar”
operations (4 times in total), they are left out of the analysis.

3. LOG ANALYSIS
3.1 Interface speciﬁc interactions

We ﬁrst determine whether we are able to detect a difference in
the interaction behavior of the subjects in different stages of the re-
search project in terms of the features speciﬁc to our search system.
Table 1 shows a cross-tabulation of the number of times an inter-
face feature is used during each stage of the research project. We
ﬁnd a signiﬁcant interaction between project stage and the number
of times interface features are used: χ2(df=6, N=483) = 11.4, p <
.05). In the ﬁrst stage the differences between using different in-
terface features are smaller than in later stages in which switching
collection is more popular.

Note, that the interactions in Table 1 are highly speciﬁc to our
interface making comparison to observations of interactions with
other search interfaces difﬁcult. Next, we will look at more general
forms of characterizing interaction behavior with our system that
are not as dependent on a speciﬁc search interface.
3.2 Direct query modiﬁcation
Reformulation types. We consider query reformulations between
two consecutive queries as direct query modiﬁcations. In the litera-
ture query reformulation has been deﬁned differently, e.g., term ad-
dition, removal, and substitution [5]. We simplify the reformulation
types into two types: new or related. Although reducing the num-
ber of reformulation types may give the query reformulation pat-
terns less discriminative power, each of the remaining types has an
intuitive interpretation. Let query q1 = {ti}n
i=1 and q2 = {tj}m
j=1

Figure 1: A screen shot of the aggregated search interface.
Numbers are used to indicate speciﬁc components in the text.

eﬁt of transforming interface speciﬁc interactions to more general
interaction types, i.e., “exploration” vs. “focused search,” is that in-
teractions observed with different interfaces become comparable.

2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Search task. The study was conducted as part of a course on “au-
dience reception studies” offered at the Media Studies department
of our university. During a four week project, students investigated
the historical context of the emancipatory role of female television
or ﬁlm personalities. The students concluded the project by writ-
ing a photo essay incorporating primary and secondary sources to
place the photos in context. The design of the project assignment
can be divided into 3 stages: (i) in the ﬁrst week students were
asked to familiarize themselves with the topic and to pick a number
of television or ﬁlm personalities; (ii) in the second week students
collected material, i.e., images and documents that motivated their
choice for these images; and (iii) in the third and fourth week stu-
dents organized the material and prepared a ﬁnal presentation.
Collections.
Six collections, relevant to the assignment about
television and ﬁlm personalities, from various archives were in-
dexed: (1) a television program collection containing 0.5M meta-
data records; (2) a photo collection with 20K photos of people
working at television studio; (3) a wiki dedicated to actors and pre-
senters (20K pages); (4) 25K television guides that are scanned
and OCRed; (5) scanned and OCRed newspapers between 1900
and 1995 (6M articles); and (6) digital newspapers between 1995
and 2010 (1M articles). These collection are indexed using Lucene
SOLR 4.0 and we use BM25 as the retrieval model.
Search system. We provided subjects with a search system that
enables various means of interaction in order to support diverse
search behaviors in the various stages of the project. The basic
funtionality of the search system is modeled after a standard web
search interface, see Figure 1, providing a search box (1) and pre-
senting result snippets in a ranked list (4). Access to the various
collections is provided by a navigation menu (2). Additionally, the
system supports facets with query preview capabilities (3) that pro-
vide users with term suggestions and the ability to quickly ﬁlter and
zoom in on a speciﬁc topic [14]. We also provide two additional
interaction capabilities accessible via tabs (5). “Combined Search”
supporting exploration of the various collections by providing an

newsenvironmentdocumentaryBBC News - Al Gore: political paralysis over climate15 Sep 2011 - Al Gore, the former vice president of America and environmental campaigner, tells the BBC about his latest...BBC - One Planet: An Interview with Al Gore19 Sep 2011 - The Nobel laureate talks false science, oil addiction and why victory is inevitable.Gore: short-term mindset deep threat to sustainable...2 Nov 2011 - Former U.S. Vice President Al Gore said Wednesday one of the biggest obstacles to investments in...The rise and fall of Al Gore17 Sep 2011 - His ideas got the whole world worried about planet's climate. Then, the Norwegian parliament bestowed Al Gore...human interestsport15432898Stage Queries
1

2

3

“mies bouwman”, “liesbeth list”, “sylvia kristel”, “monique van de ven”.
Note: Each of the query is a Dutch celebrity’s name.
“sonja barend”, “sonja barend op maandag”, “sonja barend award”, “sonja op
maandag”, “sonja barend nts”.
Note: Sonja Barend is a Dutch television personality.
“wie van de drie", “sonja’s goed nieuws show”, “goed nieuws show”, “sonja
goed nieuws show", “wie van de drie”, “sonja goed nieuws show”.
Note: “Wie van de drie” and “Goed nieuws show” are two TV programs that
Sonja Barend has been involved in.

Figure 2: A comparison of the percentage of direct query mod-
iﬁcation types in 3 stages: “new query” versus “related query”.

be two consecutive queries. q2 is a “new” query with respect to
q1 if q1 ∩ q2 = ∅, and a “related” query otherwise. That is, two
queries are related if the terms in two queries overlap. We assume
that users issue “new” queries for different topics, and “related”
queries for related topics. From our log data, we obtain 42, 128,
and 82 consecutive query pairs in stage 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
Results. Figure 2 shows the composition of direct query modiﬁ-
cations in each of the three stages. That is, the percentage of “new”
and “related” queries among all direct query modiﬁcations. We
see that the compositions show clear differences between the three
stages. In stage 1, “new” queries are the majority. The percent-
age of “new” queries decreases as the users move towards further
stages of their search task. In stage 3, the percentage of “new” and
“related” queries is relatively balanced. This implies that, while
reformulating queries, users tend to issue more queries on differ-
ent topics in the initial stage, and in later stages more queries on
related topics. A χ2 test conﬁrms that there is a signiﬁcant inter-
action between project stage and the number of new and related
queries issued: χ2(df = 2, N = 252) = 21.14, p < 0.01.

Figure 3 shows patterns of query reformulation actions. In these
graphs, nodes include three states: s (starting query), new (new
query), and rel (related query); and edges are weighted by a transi-
tion probability from one node to another, calculated as count(ni →
nj)/count(ni). For instance, after issuing a “new” query, the prob-
ability of issuing a “related” query in stage 1 is 0.08, and the proba-
bility of issuing a “new” query is 0.92. While our data is too sparse
to examine the difference between these patterns, we do observe
that transition probabilities change across stages.

In summary, patterns of users’ query reformulations seem to re-
ﬂect the underlying stages of the search task. In particular, in initial
stages users issue queries associated with more diverse topics than
in later stages. That is, initial queries are more likely exploratory,
while later queries are more focused. The stages of the assignment,
and the necessity to ﬁrst explore a topic before focussing on a spe-
ciﬁc aspect both contribute to these variations in search behavior.
Note, however that it is possible to discriminate between these be-
haviors based solely on the queries submitted to the system.

It is of course possible that queries with completely different sets
of terms refer to similar topics. Analyzing the semantics in this
case of the queries would be useful [4], which we plan for future
investigation. Here, without a systematic mapping between queries
and their underlying topics, we show in Table 2 an example of a
user’s queries in different stages, which to some extent illustrates
the type of topics being searched. In this example, in stage 1, the
user searched for a number of female dutch television personalties,
using their names as queries. In stage 2, his/her search concerns

Table 2: An example of the sequence of queries issued by a user
in different stages.

different topics associated with Sonja Barend, a famous Dutch tele-
vision personality. In stage 3, his/her queries are focused on two
speciﬁc TV programs that Sonja Barend has been involved in.
3.3 Indirect query modiﬁcation
Indirect query modiﬁcation types.
Some interfaces provide
users with additional input components to a query input box. In
such systems direct query modiﬁcation patterns may not be as salient
a feature to differentiate task stages By using these input com-
ponents, users indirectly revise the queries they have issued. We
therefore examine how users use these indirect modiﬁcations of the
same query in different search stages.

We consider the following operations as indirect query modiﬁ-
cation: switch screen, change collection, and check/uncheck ﬁlters.
Switching screen allows users to review top results from different
collections. Changing collection allows user to query a different
collection, and applying ﬁlters allows users to explore results in
speciﬁc aspects of the query. These operations correspond to dif-
ferent ways to explore different aspects of the query.

Intuitively, as shown in the direct query reformulations, users
may explore more in the initial stage, and narrow down their search
with less exploration in later stages. However, while it could be that
users are indeed exploring the content of the collections, an alterna-
tive explanation would be that they are simply exploring the func-
tionality of the system. To this end, we investigate an additional
set of operations, referred to as result examination operations, in-
cluding pagination, view document, bookmark document. Different
from the above exploration operations, with these operations users
examine the retrieved documents with respect to a (unmodiﬁed)
speciﬁc query. If users were trying out the system features, intu-
itively, they would not dig into the details of the retrieved content.
To clarify, the indirect query modiﬁcations only include explo-
ration actions, excluding the result examination operations. We in-
vestigate the former to see whether users’ exploration behavior dif-
fers across stages, and the later as signals to indicate whether users
explore the content or the functionality of the system.
Results. Unlike direct query modiﬁcation that occurs between two
queries, indirect modiﬁcation occurs within a same query. Table 3
shows the average number of exploration actions per-query in the
three stages. We see that there is a signiﬁcant difference between
the number of exploration actions issued in stage 1 and that of stage
2 and 3. This conﬁrms our expectation that users explore more
different aspects/collections with respect to a same query in the
initial stage, and less in later stages.

Table 4 shows that, in terms of the per-query number of result ex-
amination operations, no signiﬁcant difference was found between
different stages. We ﬁnd no evidence that users examine less doc-
uments/result lists in the ﬁrst stage compared to the later stages.
This suggests that the difference between exploration behaviors in
different stages can not be explained by “initial exploration of the

899(a) stage 1

(b) stage 2

(c) stage 3

Figure 3: The subﬁgures (a), (b), and (c) shows the transition probabilities for stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3 of the project respectively.

Stages Avg.#E Comparisons
1
2
3

1 vs. 2
2 vs. 3
1 vs. 3

1.81
0.85
0.90

p-values
0.04
0.82
0.03

Table 3: Comparing the number of “exploring” actions (#E) in
the 3 stages, signiﬁcance tested using Wilcoxon ranksums test.

Stages Avg.#A Comparisons
1
2
3

1 vs. 2
2 vs. 3
1 vs. 3

2.63
2.13
2.58

p-values
0.15
0.21
0.67

Table 4: Comparing the number of “examination operations”
actions (#A) throughout the 3 stages.

system features”, given that users show similar behavior in examine
details of retrieved content.

4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We have investigated user search behavior in a complex multi-
session search task, with a search system that provides various
types of input components. We conﬁrm results from previous stud-
ies that user search behavior changes during the various stages of an
information seeking task and that variations in the use of speciﬁc
input components are salient features in detecting these changes.
We further show that users’ query modiﬁcation behavior, both in
terms of direct query reformulations as well as in terms of indi-
rect modiﬁcations derived from operations on advanced interface
components reﬂects the underlying task stages users go through.
With direct query modiﬁcation, users explore more diverse topics
in the initial stage of their task compared to later stages, which are
more focused on related topics. With indirect query modiﬁcation,
users explore more aspects of a single query in the early stage com-
pared to later stages. Being able to transform interface speciﬁc in-
teractions to more general interaction types, while maintaining the
ability to discriminate between stages, suggests that user interac-
tion behavior can be described in a form comparable across search
interfaces with varying input components.

Our study design did not allow for complete control of all con-
ditions. Users were not restricted to our system to accomplish their
assignment, reducing the potential number of queries issued and
limiting our analysis to just that subset. Also, the size of the search
logs we acquired is too small to allow reliable study of higher order
query modiﬁcation sequences. Our planned follow-up research is
to acquire search log data from a wider variety of search interfaces

and tasks, to verify the utility of direct and indirect query modiﬁ-
cations to analyze user behavior in information seeking tasks.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by EU Commission FP7 grant nr 257024
the Fish4Knowledge project, and by NWO project nr 640.004.802.
5. REFERENCES
[1] J. Arguello, W.-C. Wu, D. Kelly, and A. Edwards. Task

complexity, vertical display and user interaction in
aggregated search. In SIGIR’12, pages 435–444, 2012.

[2] A. Aula, R. M. Khan, and Z. Guan. How does search
behavior change as search becomes more difﬁcult? In
SIGCHI’10, pages 35–44, 2010.

[3] N. J. Belkin, R. N. Oddy, and H. M. Brooks. Ask for

information retrieval: Part i. background and theory. J. doc.,
38(2):61–71, 1982.

[4] V. Hollink, T. Tsikrika, and A. P. de Vries. Semantic search

log analysis: a method and a study on professional image
search. JASIST, 62(4):691–713, 2011.

[5] B. J. Jansen, D. L. Booth, and A. Spink. Patterns of query

reformulation during web searching. JASIST, 60(7):
1358–1371, 2009.

[6] D. Kelly, K. Gyllstrom, and E. W. Bailey. A comparison of
query and term suggestion features for interactive searching.
In SIGIR’09, pages 371–378, 2009.

[7] B. Kules, R. Capra, M. Banta, and T. Sierra. What do

exploratory searchers look at in a faceted search interface?
In JCDL’09, pages 313–322, 2009.

[8] Y. Li and N. J. Belkin. A faceted approach to conceptualizing

tasks in information seeking. IPM, 44(6):1822–1837, 2008.

[9] M. Melucci. Contextual search: A computational

framework. FnTIR, 6(4-5):257–405, 2012.

[10] M. Smucker and J. Allan. Find-similar: similarity browsing

as a search tool. In SIGIR’06, pages 461–468, 2006.

[11] S. Sushmita, H. Joho, M. Lalmas, and R. Villa. Factors

affecting click-through behavior in aggregated search
interfaces. In CIKM’10, pages 519–528, 2010.

[12] P. Vakkari, M. Pennanen, and S. Serola. Changes of search

terms and tactics while writing a research proposal: A
longitudinal case study. IPM, 39(3):445–463, 2003.

[13] R. Villa, I. Cantador, H. Joho, and J. M. Jose. An aspectual
interface for supporting complex search tasks. In SIGIR’09,
pages 379–386, 2009.

[14] R. W. White and R. A. Roth. Exploratory search: Beyond the
query-response paradigm. Synthesis Lectures on Information
Concepts, Retrieval, and Services, 1(1):1–98, 2009.

new0.92rel0.08s0.800.200.670.33new0.86rel0.14s0.540.460.500.50new0.48rel0.52s0.540.460.420.58900