Studying Page Life Patterns in Dynamical Web

Alexey Tikhonov, Ivan Bogatyy, Pavel Burangulov, Liudmila Ostroumova,

Vitaliy Koshelev, Gleb Gusev

Yandex

{altsoph, loken17, burangulov, ostroumova-la, vakoshelev, gleb57}@yandex-team.ru

16 Leo Tolstoy St., Moscow, 119021 Russia

ABSTRACT
With the ever-increasing speed of content turnover on the
web, it is particularly important to understand the patterns
that pages’ popularity follows. This paper focuses on the
dynamical part of the web, i.e. pages that have a limited
lifespan and experience a short popularity outburst within
it. We classify these pages into ﬁve patterns based on how
quickly they gain popularity and how quickly they lose it.
We study the properties of pages that belong to each pattern
and determine content topics that contain disproportion-
ately high fractions of particular patterns. These develop-
ments are utilized to create an algorithm that approximates
with reasonable accuracy the expected popularity pattern of
a web page based on its URL and, if available, prior knowl-
edge about its domain’s topics.

Categories and Subject Descriptions: H.3.3 [Informa-
tion Storage and Retrieval]:
Information Search and Re-
trieval

General Terms: Theory, Experimentation

Keywords: temporal proﬁles; web page popularity; time
series; classiﬁcation.

1.

INTRODUCTION

A lot of eﬀort has been put recently into understanding
the dynamical aspects of collective attention on the web. A
number of papers were devoted to the analysis and predic-
tion of information diﬀusion, evaluating it in terms of user
inﬂuence [1] and popularity of diﬀerent pieces of content in
social media, such as topics [9], blog posts [4], links [1, 7],
and news [10].

From a search engine perspective, it would be useful to
study the global activity dynamics of web pages, that is, the
patterns that the total traﬃc of a single page can follow.
First, some state-of-the-art crawling methods employ user
browsing behavior while optimizing their policies [6]. We
believe the performance of such crawling policies may be im-
proved by incorporating the prediction of new pages’ future

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

popularity. Second, the role of the web as a primary source
of up-to-date information becomes increasingly important,
which leads to a signiﬁcant portion of pages becoming useless
several days after their creation. A proper understanding of
conditions that cause traﬃc decay of a page may enable us
to appropriately detect and remove lifeless content from a
search engine index, thus reducing computational resources
needed to process a query.

In this paper, we provide a large-scale temporal analysis
of web traﬃc by examining the stream of visits to web pages
from users in a European country, employing the browsing
log from a popular toolbar. In this study we focus on dynam-
ical activity proﬁles of web pages whose lifespan is limited
to a short period of activity spike. We deﬁne activity proﬁle
of a page as the time series of its daily visits count.

A possible approach to the analysis of the temporal activ-
ity is splitting the whole variety of observed time series into
a limited number of patterns. We build a multiclass clas-
siﬁer trained on a manually annotated dataset of activity
time series. Each time series is judged as belonging to one
of the following ﬁve categories: the four spike patterns cor-
responding to the presence or absence of signiﬁcant activity
before and after the peak moment and the case of a tempo-
ral proﬁle which does not look like a spike. We apply the
obtained classiﬁer to a large-scale dataset of pages and use
their predicted labels as estimates of their popularity pat-
terns. These estimates enable us to study the dependence
of web page activity proﬁles on diﬀerent factors, such as the
second-level domain of a page and the topic of the domain.
We observe a noticeable connection between the popular-
ity pattern of a page and the topic of its domain. For each
of the four spike patterns, we extract topics with the highest
fraction of the considered spike pattern (measured against
frequency in the whole dataset). The obtained results can
mostly be well explained and look intuitive given the com-
mon knowledge about the user browsing behavior.

Encouraged by these observations, we train several multi-
class classiﬁers that predict the (estimated) popularity pat-
tern of a page by (1) the topic of its domain, (2) its URL’s
tokens, and (3) prior distribution over popularity patterns
for the pages with the same domain. The obtained results
argue that the temporal popularity proﬁle of a newly discov-
ered web page may be somewhat accurately predicted by its
URL. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study de-
voted to the temporal popularity patterns of Internet pages.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The
next section is a review of related works in social media do-
main. We describe the data we use for designing activity

905Figure 1: Heat map captures distribution of activity
proﬁles in the space of two factors: portions before and
after peak. The stripe on the right indicates density per
unit cell. There are no pronounced clusters in this space.

Figure 2: Heat maps capture distributions of ac-
tivity portions before and after peak for diﬀerent
temporal patterns of activity spikes. The stripes in-
dicate density per unit cell.

proﬁles and provide analysis of their patterns in Sections 3
and 4 respectively. In Section 5 we describe the eﬀect of do-
main topics on their page popularity patterns. We describe
results of prediction of popularity patterns in Section 6. Sec-
tion 7 concludes the paper.

2. RELATED WORK

There is little work on the analysis of the popularity dy-
namics of web pages. In [8] Radinsky et al. propose a phys-
ical model that captures popularity variation of a query, a
document, and a query-document pair. However, their study
deals with traﬃc from a particular search engine only, which
may be biased. Furthermore, the authors focus on modeling
and predicting future popularity, while our task focuses on
analyzing the distribution of popularity patterns.

In [11] Yang et al. performed a clustering of two sets of
time series, ﬁrst one quantifying mentions of popular phrases
in news sources and the second one measuring appearance
of hashtags in Twitter, both using hour granularity. In [5]
authors cluster time series of Twitter hashtags usage at day
granularity relying on two factors: the portion of activity
before the peak day and the portion of activity after it. The
results obtained in the two papers are rather similar and
capture the four types of spikes corresponding to the pre-
sense of absense of signiﬁcant activity before and after the
peak moment. Relying on these results, we propose a clas-
siﬁcation algorithm to determine the types of patterns that
the temporal series under consideration follow.

3. DATA PREPARATION

All the experiments in this paper were performed on a
fully anonymized web page visits log from a search engine1

1yandex.com

browser toolbar, used by millions of people across diﬀerent
countries.

We extract records made in the 80-day period from August
27, 2012 to November 14, 2012. For each visited URL in the
log, we calculate the number of hits the URL received on
each of those 80 days. The obtained time series represent
the temporal activity proﬁles we study.

We ﬁlter the dataset by imposing two conditions. First,
we remove all pages that have non-zero visits on the ﬁrst day
of the considered time frame. Those pages are likely to have
been created before the time period we examine, making us
unable to analyze the beginning of their lifespan. In partic-
ular, this ﬁlters out the already popular web pages, allowing
us to focus on the short-lived pages that form dynamical
part of the Web. Second, we remove pages whose maximal
activity does not reach 100 hits per day. This allows us to
ﬁlter out non-popular pages, leaving only the most impor-
tant content for the study.
In total, the collected dataset
describes activity proﬁles of approximately 3.1M web pages.

4. TEMPORAL PATTERNS OF PAGE LIFE
This section describes the particular classes of temporal
activity patterns that we distinguish in our study. Both
the results in the previous works and our own observations
conﬁrm the validity of the following ﬁve-types classiﬁcation
model. The ﬁrst four types represent diﬀerent types of ac-
tivity spike with a pronounced single peak. The slope of
a spike before the peak can be either sharp (a quick rise
of popularity in one or two days) or soft (the activity rises
steadily throughout a longer period of time). Similarly, the
slope of a spike after the peak can be light or substantial.
Diﬀerent combinations of slope types before and after the
peak form the four types of spikes: (1) sharp rise, light tail
, (3) soft rise, light
. The ﬁfth type

, (2) sharp rise, substantial tail

tail

, (4) soft rise, substantial tail

906represents proﬁles that (5) do not look like a spike. This in-
cludes several pronounced peaks, or even a period of stable
user attention strictly limited to a certain period of time.

In [5], Lehman et al. proposed to cluster the temporal
proﬁles of user attention by projecting them onto the space
of the following two factors: the portion of activity before
the peak day and the portion of activity after that. Unfor-
tunately, this approach does not suit well the case of web
pages, which are not necessarily very popular within our
study and thus their activity proﬁles are noisier and allow
for more variety within each of the spike types (see the dis-
tribution of activity proﬁles in the space of those two factors
on Fig. 1).

Instead, we perform a multiclass classiﬁcation as follows.
We manually examine a sample of 1377 URLs, annotating
their activity proﬁles with ﬁve labels (1)-(5) described above.
We then train a Friedman’s gradient boosting decision tree
model [2] on the obtained judged dataset, extracting the
signiﬁcant properties of the daily visits graphs to use as fea-
tures. We used 12 features, with the most signiﬁcant three
being: the fraction of visits that happen 3 days after the
peak and later, the time diﬀerence between the ﬁrst visit to
the page and its peak day, and the fraction of visits before
the peak day.

The classes 3 and 4 (soft rise case) are rather rare, consti-
tuting approximately 1.5% and 0.5% respectively in a ran-
dom sample. As a result, the trained algorithm is biased to
detect them even less often than they occur. We overcome
this problem as follows. After the ﬁrst round of annotat-
ing a random sample and training the algorithm, we use the
obtained algorithm to ﬁlter the whole database for URLs
that are likely to fall into classes 3 and 4. After that, we
annotate this particular sample in order to obtain a better
representation of the rare classes.
In total, we annotated
408, 149, 170, 65, and 585 proﬁles falling into classes 1 to 5
respectively.

Tab. 2, A) represents the confusion matrix of the classiﬁ-
cation model averaged over test for 10-fold cross validation
on the extended judged dataset.

A)

predicted

B)

d
e
t
a
t
o
n
n
a

1
2
3
4
5

1
1

-0,54
-0,07
-0,20
-0,65

1
2
3
4
5

1

354
19
3
1
18

2
23
110

1
2
21

3
12
0

126
18
48

4
1
5
12
32
6

5
18
15
28
12
492

2

-0,54

1

-0,14
-0,014
-0,28

3

-0,07
-0,14

1

0,06
0,11

4

-0,20
-0,01
0,06

1

0,12

5

-0,65
-0,28
0,11
0,12

1

Table 2: A) Confusion matrix of the classiﬁcation model
that predicts the temporal pattern of a web page activity
proﬁle; B) Correlation matrix of frequencies of popular-
ity patterns over a set of second-level domains.

We evaluate the performance of multi-class classiﬁers uti-
lizing MAUC (multi-class AUC) as deﬁned in [3]. This mea-
sure is simple to implement, does not require weighting of

error types, and is not sensitive to highly unbalanced dis-
tribution of prior class probabilities. The value of MAUC
averaged over test for 10-fold cross validation is 0.89 for our
classiﬁcation model.

We then apply the classiﬁcation model to the whole dataset
and treat the time series-based predictions as the actual pat-
tern types. As a result, we are able to analyze the pattern
types of 3.1M URLs in the context of their domain topic
and other properties as explained in the next sections. See
Tab. 3 for statistics of pattern distribution over the dataset
and Fig. 2 for the distribution of activity portions before
and after the peak for diﬀerent popularity patterns.

(cid:80) 1

class

2

3

4

5

URL count
URL portion
hits portion

3.1M 1.6M 0.7M 18K 24K 0.7M
100% 52% 24% 0,6% 0,8% 23%
100% 28% 20% 0.8% 0.7% 50%

Table 3: Rate statistics including portions of hits gath-
ered by URL’s of diﬀerent temporal proﬁles.

5. DOMAIN TOPICS

In this section we study the distribution of pages popular-
ity patterns conditioned by diﬀerent topics of their domains.
For this purpose, we use a public database of domains manu-
ally categorized by their topics for a popular search engine.
We train a Naive Bayes classiﬁer on this data by employ-
ing unigram features. For each page whose activity proﬁle
is represented in our dataset, we deﬁne its second-level do-
main and apply the obtained topic classiﬁer to the content
pages of that domain. If some topic covers a greater por-
tion of that pages, we attribute the whole domain to that
topic. After that, we mark out 154 most frequent topics
according to the number of pages of our dataset whose do-
main is attributed to these topics. Covering about 87% of
content, they are employed as domain topic features in the
classiﬁcation tasks of the next section.

For each of the four patterns of spikes, we rank these 154
topics according to the frequency of that pattern within their
pages. We present the top topics of the four lists in Tab. 1.
As we see, the ﬁrst proﬁle is more typical for news pages
that are meant for a short-term people attention, such as
sport events, concerts, etc. The traﬃc of these pages is at-
tributed to the event moment, it rises and falls quickly. The
second pattern is typical for pages, which appear on large
entertainment portals devoted to fun or hobby. They gather
a high traﬃc right after their creation and keep popular for
some time. The third pattern is determined by rapid fall of
popularity after a long rise. It is typical for pages devoted to
upcoming events, the most striking example is weather fore-
cast. Another example is a car ads, usually gaining traﬃc
until the car is sold. The third pattern is not well sepa-
rated from the fourth pattern, which is more frequent for
blog posts and other social media content, whose popularity
rises relatively slowly till its peak and then falls gradually.
We also approach the following research question: how
the frequencies of the ﬁve popularity patterns among pages
within diﬀerent domains correlate with each other? For this
purpose, we created a dataset of second-level domains (re-
ferred to as ”small dataset”) that are represented by at least
10 web pages in our dataset of activity proﬁles. This dataset
covers 95.3% of the whole dataset of activity proﬁles. We

907sharp rise, light tail

soft rise, light tail

p

u
65K 89% 1,72 photoart

s

u
2,5K 71% 2,96 weather

topic

s

sharp rise, substantial tail
topic

p

s

p

soft rise, substantial tail
u
topic
s
3K 5,5% 9,5 photo
album
hosting

u
27K 5,5% 7,2

p

16K 5,1% 8,9 pets

29K 5,2% 6,8

27K 2,3% 4,0 blog

30K 5,0% 6,6

hosting

30K 2,2% 3,9 media
editors

32K 4,7% 6,2

topic
online
betting

news
agencies
enter-
tainment

167K 88% 1,71 amateur

photo

117K 87% 1,67 knitting

2,4K 68% 2,85 car
ads

3,3K 60% 2,50 photo
album
hosting

biathlon

4.1K 85% 1,66 caricatures 7,5K 59% 2,47 blog

hosting

Table 1: Topics with the highest domination for diﬀerent patterns of activity proﬁles. Here u denotes URLs count, p
is the URL’s rate of the current popularity pattern, s equals to p normalized by the prior rate of the pattern (given at
Tab. 3).

treat the portions of each of the ﬁve popularity patterns
within a certain domain as its ﬁve features. Tab.2, B) rep-
resents the Pearson correlation matrix of the pairs of the
ﬁve domain features over the small dataset. This matrix
captures which pairs of patterns are collaborative and which
are competitive in the context of their domain. We see, for
example, the largest negative correlation of the ﬁrst and the
ﬁrth patterns, which means that short-term and long-term
web pages are well-separated at the level of their domains.

6. TEMPORAL PATTERN PREDICTION

Encouraged by results of the previous section, we trained
several classiﬁers that predict web page popularity pattern
by its URL. We used the following three groups of features:
(1) topics of page’s second-level domain (binary ones), (2)
weights of Naive Bayesian classiﬁer trained on URL tokens,
and (3) the ﬁve domain features. The features of (1) and
(3) groups are described in the previous section. We trained
Friedman’s gradient boosting decision tree models [2] with
10-fold cross validation on (1) the dataset of activity proﬁles,
and (2) the small dataset by employing diﬀerent combina-
tions of feature groups. Performance of the obtained models
is reported in Tab. 4.

dataset
whole

large dom.

(1)
63,6
64,1

(2)
72,0
73,1

(1)+(2)

72,2
73,4

(3)
68,3
68,5

(1)+(2)+(3)

73,0
73,7

Table 4: MAUC (%) of classiﬁers predicting popularity
pattern of a web page by diﬀerent groups of features.

The prediction performance increases if we restrict the
task to large domains that provide richer information on
their properties.

7. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we examined diﬀerent patterns that tem-
poral activity proﬁles of web pages’ traﬃc can follow. We
proposed an algorithm to automatically classify the activ-
ity proﬁles that have a short-term popularity spike into ﬁve
diﬀerent patterns depending on how quickly they gain and
lose popularity. The algorithm is subsequently used to con-
duct a large-scale analysis. The main contribution of this
paper is the examination of the degree of depedence that

a page’s activity pattern has upon the factors that can be
obtained before the actual pattern is known: (1) the distri-
bution of topics on page’s domain, (2) tokens of page’s URL,
and (3) prior distribution over popularity patterns on page’s
domain. We show that a signiﬁcant amount of information
is indeed contained in the aforementioned factors, and build
a classiﬁcation algorithm that allows to predict the activity
pattern a page will have with a reasonable accuracy.

8. REFERENCES
[1] E. Bakshy, J. Hofman, W. Mason, and D. Watts.

Identifying ’inﬂuencers’ on twitter. In WSDM, 2011.
[2] J. H. Friedman. Stochastic gradient boosting. CSDA,

38:367–378, 1999.

[3] D. J. Hand and R. J. Till. A simple generalisation of

the area under the roc curve for multiple class
classiﬁcation problems. Mach. Learn., 45(2):171–186,
oct 2001.

[4] L. Hong, O. Dan, and B. D. Davison. Predicting

popular messages in twitter. In WWW, pages 57–58,
2011.

[5] J. Lehmann, B. Gon¸calves, J. J. Ramasco, and

C. Cattuto. Dynamical classes of collective attention
in twitter. In WWW, pages 251–260, 2012.

[6] M. Liu, R. Cai, M. Zhang, and L. Zhang. User

browsing behavior-driven web crawling. In CIKM,
pages 87–92, 2011.

[7] S. Myers and J. Leskovec. Clash of the contagions:

Cooperation and competition in information diﬀusion.
In ICDM, pages 539–548, 2012.

[8] K. Radinsky, K. Svore, S. Dumais, J. Teevan,

A. Bocharov, and E. Horvitz. Modeling and predicting
behavioral dynamics on the web. In WWW, pages
599–608, 2012.

[9] A. Saha and V. Sindhwani. Learning evolving and

emerging topics in social media: a dynamic nmf
approach with temporal regularization. In WSDM,
pages 693–702, 2012.

[10] G. Szabo and B. A. Huberman. Predicting the

popularity of online content. In WWW, pages 80–88,
2010.

[11] J. Yang and J. Leskovec. Patterns of temporal

variation in online media. In WSDM, pages 177–186,
2011.

908