Temporal Variance of Intents in Multi-faceted

Event-driven Information Needs∗

Stewart Whiting, Ke Zhou &

{stewh,zhouke,jj}@dcs.gla.ac.uk

Joemon M. Jose

School of Computing Science

University of Glasgow, UK

Mounia Lalmas

Yahoo! Labs

Barcelona, Spain

mounia@acm.org

ABSTRACT
Time is often important for understanding user intent during search
activity, especially for information needs related to event-driven
topics. Diversity for multi-faceted information needs ensures that
ranked documents optimally cover multiple facets when a user’s
intent is uncertain. Effective diversity is reliant on methods to (i)
discover and represent facets, and (ii) determine how likely each
facet is the user’s intent (i.e., its popularity). Past work has de-
veloped several techniques addressing these issues, however, they
have concentrated on static approaches which do not consider the
temporal nature of new and evolving intents and their popularity. In
many cases, what a user expects may change dramatically over time
as events develop. In this work we study the temporal variance of
search intents for event-driven information needs using Wikipedia.
First, we model intents based upon the structure represented by the
section hierarchy of Wikipedia articles closely related to the infor-
mation need. Using this technique, we investigate whether tempo-
ral changes in the content structure, i.e. in a section’s text, reﬂect
the temporal popularity of the intent. We map intents taken from a
query-log (as ground-truth) to Wikipedia article sections and found
that a large proportion are indeed reﬂected in topic-related article
structure. By correlating the change activity of each section with
the use of the intent query over time, we found that section change
activity does reﬂect temporal popularity of many intents. Further-
more, we show that popularity between intents changes over time
for event-driven topics.

Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval -
Search Process, Selection Process]
Keywords: Intent; Diversity; Temporal; Time; Events

1.

INTRODUCTION

Under-speciﬁed or ambiguous queries are a common problem for
web information retrieval systems [2], especially when the queries
used are often only a few words in length.
In some cases the
user may provide an information need which is ambiguous as it
has many interpretations. For instance, the query ‘jaguar’ could
∗This research is partially supported by the EU-funded project:
LiMoSINe (288024).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGIR’13, July 28–August 1, 2013, Dublin, Ireland.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2034-4/13/07 ...$15.00.

refer to the car, animal or operating system. On the other hand,
the information need may have multiple facets (or synonymously,
search intents), each covering a speciﬁc part of the broader topic.
The user’s actual intent may be one or more of these facets. For in-
stance, the query ‘steve jobs’ could refer to facets such as his death,
biography, movie or keynotes, etc. Without further clariﬁcation it
is impossible to know the actual intent of the user. To alleviate this
problem, result diversiﬁcation is a common strategy employed to
maximise average retrieval effectiveness for all users. For multi-
faceted queries, diversity attempts to optimally rank documents to
cover as many possible search intents of the query in the least re-
sults possible.

Time plays a central role in information retrieval (IR) as infor-
mation needs may often arise from recent media interaction, stim-
ulating users to seek information about topics related to ongoing
events and phenomena [1]. Many queries have a temporal afﬁnity
affecting popularity and in many cases, intent over time [5, 9]. Pre-
vious work has demonstrated the temporal variance in popularity
of ambiguous search intents [9]. In this work we focus on studying
the temporal variance of search intents in multi-faceted information
needs. This poses two challenges: (i) discovering and representing
multi-faceted search intents that evolve over time, and (ii) the likeli-
hood that each search intent will be that which the user is interested
in over time.

Despite ongoing temporal change, existing approaches to multi-
faceted intent diversity assume a static set of search intents and
likelihood (popularity). Particularly for event-driven topics which
are ever changing, this may lead to a sub-optimal ranking. For ex-
ample, consider the 2011 Thailand Floods (illustrated in Figure 1).
At ﬁrst, people were interested in ﬁnding out about the local im-
pact. As the media reported the impact of ﬂooding on manufactur-
ing facilities, attention shifted to the impact on hard drive supply
and prices. As the supply issues eased, focus was once again on
dealing with the aftermath and how to avoid problems again.

While event-driven topics are occurring, there will be either very
little or no past evidence available for search intents and likelihood;
and old evidence may not reﬂect real-time user expectations. De-
veloping IR systems which can respond in real-time to changing
user expectations motivates the need to ﬁnd reliable sources of re-
cent event information. For this reason, we look towards a large-
scale real-time collaboratively edited encyclopaedia: Wikipedia1,
as a means of modelling and representing multi-faceted intents and
their temporal variance. With users collaborating globally, major
events and phenomena are often described shortly after their oc-
currence [7, 6]. Previous work has exploited Wikipedia taxonomy
structure and page linking for representing non-temporal intents for
diversity [4]. However, to model and represent ﬁner-grained in-

1http://www.wikipedia.org

989tents of event-driven information needs, we propose to exploit the
structure of sections contained in articles related to the information
need. Furthermore, based on the conjecture that sections which
change frequently are popular, we posit that the change activity of
a section reﬂects its likelihood as a search intent. Henceforth, we
motivate two research questions for this paper:

RQ1. Does Wikipedia article structure reﬂect the search intents
for multi-faceted queries (i.e. Do sections/subsections each reﬂect
an intent)?

RQ2. Does the evolution of an article (i.e., sections being cre-

ated, changed, etc.) reﬂect intent popularity over time?

Our contribution is three-fold: to the best of our knowledge, this
is a ﬁrst attempt to (i) investigate diversity for event-driven queries,
(ii) use the stream of Wikipedia article changes to investigate tem-
poral intent variance for event-driven queries2, and (iii) quantify
temporal variance between a set of search intents for a topic.

2. RELATED WORK

Recent IR research has investigated “diversity-based”, or, “sub-
topic” retrieval approaches for modelling user search intents dur-
ing search tasks [3, 8], where ambiguity or multi-faceted informa-
tion needs cause relevance uncertainty. An intent-diversiﬁed result
ranking can be created by interleaving documents sampled from
possible search intents, with the importance of each intent indicated
by several features such as prior search intent click-through rate or
original document relevance. Although the temporal variance of
multi-faceted intents and their popularity has been acknowledged
[5], little work has quantitatively studied the temporal variability of
multi-faceted intents, assuming they maintain static over time.

The implications of time and temporality has been studied in
many IR problems. Adar at al. [1] quantitatively studied the tem-
poral correlation of topics appearing across different media (e.g.
blogs, news and television listings) and search engines as inter-
est in ongoing events and phenomena spreads. Kulkarni et al.
[5] conclude that many web search queries and relevant docu-
ments are inﬂuenced by a periodic or real-time event-driven tem-
poral dimension. Repeatedly sourced relevance judgements sug-
gest temporally-sensitive information needs and query intent, as a
consequence of events. In past work [9], we studied the tempo-
ral variability inherent in many ambiguous information needs, and
simulated the effect on diversity evaluation. In this work, we aim
to observe how multi-faceted search intents also vary over time.

Wikipedia article editing activity and page view streams have
seen interest in recent event detection and tracking work [6, 7]. Hu
at al. [4] utilised Wikipedia taxonomy, article link structure and
entire articles to statically represent the most likely intents for any
information need.

3. RQ1: REPRESENTING INTENTS

To address our research questions, we must ﬁrst represent multi-
faceted search intents so that we can evaluate Wikipedia-derived
intents (i.e. those appearing in Wikipedia article section structure)
against ground-truth search intents.

As we are studying events following their occurrence, for sim-
plicity at this stage we assume that all ground-truth search intents
are present during the event. Later, in Section 4 we investigate
search intent popularity over time.

We select a set of 20 event-driven queries/topics to test our hy-
pothesis, outlined in Section 3.1. In Section 3.2 we describe how
to obtain the ground-truth of possible search intents. Further, in
2Note that the methodology used within this paper can also be applied to general,
non-event driven queries. We leave broader query categories to future work.

Section 3.3 we describe our methodology for assessing the matches
between ground-truth search intents and Wikipedia article sections.
Finally, in Section 3.4 we present results of representing search in-
tents using Wikipedia sections.
3.1 Queries

We select two categories of event-driven queries for testing our
hypothesis, related to signiﬁcant events between January 2010 and
December 2012. 4 individuals were asked to identify major events
in the Wikipedia 2011-2012 News pages3, and provide the query
they would use to ﬁnd general information on the event. From this
pool of events and queries we selected two sets of 10 topics based
on the following characteristics.

All topics are themselves an event, with each having a central de-
scriptive Wikipedia article. Topics 1-10 are relatively short events
(e.g., severe weather or a shooting), which have most temporal in-
terest between 1 to 14 days. In contrast, topics 11-20 are prolonged
events which happen over many weeks, months or even years (e.g.,
the Libya Intervention). Often these longer events are composed
of many facets, concerning different people, places and interac-
tion over time4. Two example categorised queries with their multi-
faceted intents are presented in Table 1. The underlying reason to

Table 1: Example short- and long-term event-driven queries, along
with their multiple facets (obtained from Google Related Searches).

Query (topic)
Eyjafjallajokull
Short-term
(Topics 1-10)

Intervention

Libya
Long-term
(Topics 11-20)

Facets (from query-log)
eyjafjallajokull effects, eyjafjallajokull facts, eyjafjalla-
jokull volcano webcam, how to pronounce eyjafjalla-
jokull, eyjafjallajokull bbc, eyjafjallajokull case study
libya intervention responsibility to protect, libya inter-
vention poll, libya intervention debate, libya intervention
timeline, libya intervention nato, libya intervention legal-
ity, libya intervention oil, libya intervention success

choose these two categories of queries is to reﬂect events with dif-
ferent temporal characteristics, particularly for investigating RQ2
in Section 4.
3.2 Search Intents

We ﬁrst obtain the ground-truth of search intents for each event-
the
driven query. For large-scale commercial search engines,
ground-truth of intents should be based on a large number of users.
Since we do not have a query-log, we instead propose an approach
to derive intent ground-truth using features provided by a com-
mercial search engine, i.e. Google. We examined the sugges-
tions provided by Google Query Auto-Completion, Google Related
Searches and Google Trends Related Searches. To select the best
source, we deﬁne the criteria as follows: (i) the source should cover
a variety of diverse intents/facets of an event, and (ii) it should
cover the most popular intents/facets so that temporal statistics can
be obtained. Based on our observation, we believe that the queries
suggested by Google Related Search met our criteria and there-
fore we chose this as the ground-truth. Google Auto-Completion
and Google Trends Related Searches data either over-reward tail
queries or do not cover multiple diverse facets. An example of
ground-truth facets obtained in this way is shown in Table 1.
3.3 Intent Matching and Assessments

To establish which ground-truth search intents are reﬂected by
Wikipedia article sections, we attempt to match each ground-truth
3http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/[2010|2011|2012]
4In this work we do not investigate seasonal event-driven queries such as Christmas.
We are interested in events that are harder to predict given a lack of past evidence.

990intent to a possible section and furthermore, assess the match
strength. This consists of several steps: (i) Event Article Identi-
ﬁcation: identifying multiple Wikipedia articles that are most re-
lated to event-driven topics, (ii) Section-Intent Automatic Match-
ing:
retrieving sections from the articles identiﬁed above, that
might match the intents (for further assessments), and (iii) Match
Assessments: assessing match strength between retrieved sections
and search intents. We illustrate each step in detail as below.

Event Article Identiﬁcation. Before listing all the candidate
sections that can be potentially matched to the search intents, the
set of Wikipedia articles most related to each event-driven topic,
{Atopic}, must be identiﬁed. Major events are typically represented
by a central article (e.g. ‘Occupy Movement’), with related arti-
cles detailing substantial aspects such as ‘Reactions to the Occupy
Movement’, ‘Occupy Movement in the United States’ and ‘Occupy
Canada’. As this work concentrates on a small number of topics we
manually identiﬁed related articles as those linked from the central
article via ‘See also:’ and ‘Main article:’ references, although past
work has proposed automatic methods [4].

Section-Intent Auto-Matching. We posit that a search intent
is reﬂected by one or more sections (or, subsections) contained in
{Atopic}. For example, the ‘Occupy Movement’ article has sec-
tions including ‘background’, ‘we are the 99%’, ‘goals’, ‘methods’,
and ‘protests’ (with a subsection for each participating country).
Despite the hierarchical nested structure of Wikipedia sections, to
avoid complexity we employ a ﬂat section structure. Hierarchy is
particularly challenging for Wikipedia articles as it will change dra-
matically over time. As such, we leave this issue open for further
work. Matching was performed semi-automatically. To begin, we
took each ground-truth search intent and extracted the intent key
terms and automatically retrieved up to three sections from {Atopic}
which most contained the term in their header title or text. For ex-
ample, for the search intent ‘libya intervention oil’, we identiﬁed
sections referring to the word ‘oil’.

Match Assessments. With the large pool of potentially matched
sections retrieved by the system described above, two separate in-
dividuals were asked to annotate the extent to which each section
reﬂected the intent. Assessments were made in three grades: either
a hard match (i.e., section is entirely about the intent), soft match
(i.e., loosely related) or no match. To prepare the ﬁnal ground-truth
intent and Wikipedia section matches, annotation conﬂicts were re-
solved by choosing the lower of the two labels (e.g., a ‘strong’ and
‘weak’ were resolved to ‘weak’).
3.4 Evaluation

To evaluate the effectiveness of search intent representation
in Wikipedia article sections against the ground-truth, we report
Recallwiki (i.e., # intents that Wikipedia covers / # total intents). It
is calculated per-topic, however we report the average.

In Table 2, we can observe that Wikipedia sections substantially
reﬂect user’s search intents as it has high Recallwiki for both hard
(0.68) and soft (0.87) assessments, which answers our RQ1. From
close examination, the search intents without coverage are gener-
ally intents that are related to a speciﬁc resource (e.g. “bbc"), or
generic type of information (e.g. “jokes"), and so are missing from
Wikipedia. These search intents are less likely to have a signiﬁcant
temporal variance as they refer to generic facets common to many
event-driven topics.

4. RQ2: TEMPORAL INTENT VARIANCE
In the previous section we evaluated representing multi-faceted
search intents with Wikipedia article structure. In this section, we
observe how the temporal variance in search intent popularity is re-

Table 2: Recallwiki of soft and hard matched intents, for topics 1-20
(All), 1-10, and 11-20.

Soft
Recallwiki
0.89
0.87
0.92

Hard
Recallwiki
0.68
0.64
0.72

Topics
All
1-10
11-20

Figure 1: Temporal popularity from 2011-09-18 for two search
intents of the Thailand Floods. Each time-series was normalised
(maintaining magnitude) and exponentially smoothed (α = 0.35).

ﬂected by section change activity in Wikipedia.
In Sections 4.1
and 4.2, we compare the ground-truth temporal popularity of a
search intent (obtained from the query-log) to the temporal volume
of changes made to the intent representation in Wikipedia, i.e., the
frequency of changes made to the text content in the article section.
Furthermore, we quantify the extent to which all search intents for
a topic vary in popularity over time.
4.1 Experiment

Comparing the temporal variance of ground-truth search intents
and Wikipedia article sections requires comparable time-series of
query volume and section change activity.

Ground-truth. Query-logs capture the popularity of facets over
time [5]. As we do not have our own large-scale query-log we rely
on the temporal query volume data provided by Google Trends5 as
the ground-truth temporal popularity for each ground-truth search
intent query. An example of this is shown in Figure 1.

In Wikipedia. Temporal changes of Wikipedia article sections
can be obtained by comparing contiguous Wikipedia article revi-
sions. The stream of changed sections can be mined from the
stream of article revision text. Standard diff and patch opera-
tions identify locations of text changes between adjacent revisions.
Each change can in turn be resolved to a speciﬁc section by seeking
its nearest parent section title header.

Section structure (e.g. section presence and hierarchy) is con-
stantly evolving during collaborative editing. In some cases, this
poses challenges for identifying the relevant section for a text
change. We leave the issues raised by this to future work.

Evaluation. To compare the ground-truth intent query popular-
ity and Wikipedia article section change activity, we aggregate the
noisy continuous stream of data points using temporal buckets to
group each time-series into a lower-dimensional series. Each new
data point represents an N day period (where N = 1,7,14 days).
5http://www.google.com/trends

051015202530020406080100Weeks since 2011-09-18Popularity (normalised volume)Thailand Floods (Ground-truth)Thailand Hard Drive Prices (Ground-truth)Thailand Floods, Background (Wiki. Section)Thailand Floods, Industrial [Problems] (Wiki. Section)991Pearson’s correlation co-efﬁcient, r, is used to measure the tempo-
ral similarity between the popularity time-series.

We quantify the variance between search intent popularity over
time as follows. For each topic’s search intents, with a temporal
bucket size of N days (N = 1,2,7) we rank sections mapped to in-
tents by their section change frequency (i.e., popularity) over each
bucket period. Spearman’s rank correlation ρ is then computed be-
tween adjacent bucket ranks, providing a measure of period to pe-
riod intent popularity similarity. Rank-based measurement is rela-
tively robust to noise, and background ﬂuctuations (e.g. weekends).
Periods of intent popularity instability are reﬂected by a low Spear-
man’s ρ, conversely, periods of stable intent popularity are reﬂected
by ρ ≈ 1. For each topic, we aggregate the average Spearman’s ρ
from all adjacent buckets over time, discarding those where ≤ 1
sections were changed. We treat any ρ < 0 as ρ = 0.
4.2 Results

In Table 3 we report the average correlation r between the
ground-truth and Wikipedia intent representation popularity, for
each temporal bucket size, and topics 1-10 and 11-20.

Considering the raw Wikipedia article change stream is rela-
tively noisy (e.g. if one editor repeatedly commits tiny changes),
short-term topics have a relatively strong correlation at all tempo-
ral bucket sizes. As the bucket size increases, correlation is in-
creased as daily noise is aggregated and smoothed. For long-term
events, correlation increases with a larger bucket size, e.g. 14 days.
This is likely caused not only by noise smoothing, but also the fact
that longer events may consist of aspects which develop over many
weeks rather than just days.

Table 3: Average temporal correlation between Wikipedia section
change activity and ground-truth query popularity.

Average Pearson r
Temporal bucket size

1 day
0.32
0.15

7 days
0.49
0.25

14 days
0.58
0.33

Topics
1-10
11-20

Table 4: Temporal variance of topic intent popularity, indicated by
mean average Spearman’s ρ (inc. stdev.), for different bucket sizes.

Mean Average Spearman’s ρ for Topics

Topics
1-10
11-20

1 day
0.08 (± 0.12)
0.03 (± 0.07)

Temporal bucket size

2 days
0.07 (± 0.14)
0.09 (± 0.09)

7 days
0.12 (± 0.16)
0.2 (± 0.2)

Quantifying Temporal Variance. We report the mean of the av-
erage Spearman’s ρ (MAρ) for each temporal bucket period, topics
1-10 and 11-20 in Table 4. For both short- and long-term events,
intent popularity varies substantially over time, indicated by a rela-
tively low MAρ for all bucket size periods. However, the relatively
large dispersion (denoted by ±) suggests temporal variance differs
considerably between topics. Overall low MAρ and per-topic in-
consistency may to some extent be caused by articles which lack a
large volume of changes during certain periods, introducing noise
especially at shorter bucket periods (e.g. 1-2 days).

Long-term topic intents (i.e. topics 11-20) vary considerably less
over 7 day periods compared to 1-2 days. This may be due to a
few intents becoming established and maintaining popularity over
longer periods, compared to the noise present at shorter bucket pe-
riods caused by non-event related section changes [7]. In compari-
son, short-term events (i.e. topics 1-10) have marginally less intent
popularity variance during short periods, as the event quickly and

consistently develops. However, there is little increase in MAρ ob-
served at longer bucket periods as there are so few changes made
outside the short duration of the event.
5. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION

We have addressed the research questions outlined in Sec-
tion 1 through preliminary experiments and analysis. We mined
multi-faceted ground-truth search intents from the Google Re-
lated Searches and matched them to sections contained in related
Wikipedia articles. Furthermore, we studied ground-truth temporal
correlation, and quantiﬁed temporal intent variance.

In RQ1 we hypothesised that Wikipedia article sections can be
used to represent search intents. Results presented in Table 2
demonstrate that there is substantial overlap of intents, suggested
by a high recall. Although not all search intents are reﬂected by
Wikipedia (e.g. ‘jokes’), major informational intents are usually
present as one or more article sections.

Extending RQ1, the aim of RQ2 was to study whether search
intent popularity is reﬂected by article section change activity, i.e.,
popular sections/intents are changed more frequently. Results pre-
sented in Table 3 suggest a medium to strong correlation for both
short- and long-term events. Short-term events correlate daily with
search intent popularity, whereas long-term events only correlate
over longer temporal intervals (e.g. 14 day periods), echoing their
slower but continued development over longer periods of time. Fur-
thermore, Table 4 illustrates the daily and weekly variance of in-
tent popularity. In particular, the popularity of short-term event in-
tents changes quickly, whereas long-term events have some intents
which remain more stable over longer periods.

Conclusion. In this work, we have studied how search intents
can be represented by Wikipedia article sections. We have estab-
lished that many search intents for event-driven topics (e.g. news
events) can be represented by Wikipedia article sections. More-
over, the popularity of each of these intents varies over time and
is reﬂected by the editing activity of each section. With little or
no query-log evidence, Wikipedia article structure offers a means
to understand (i) the search intents currently present and emerging,
and (ii) the temporal popularity of each intent.

Temporal intent variance motivates time-aware IR model devel-
opment. There is much scope to improve this model of representing
search intents and popularity using evolving Wikipedia structure.
6. REFERENCES
[1] E. Adar, D. S. Weld, B. N. Bershad, and S. S. Gribble. Why we search:

visualizing and predicting user behavior. In WWW ’07, pages 161–170, New
York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.

[2] R. Agrawal, S. Gollapudi, A. Halverson, and S. Ieong. Diversifying search

results. In WSDM ’09, pages 5–14, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.

[3] J. G. Carbonell and J. Goldstein. The use of mmr, diversity-based reranking for
reordering documents and producing summaries. In SIGIR ’98, pages 335–336,
1998.

[4] J. Hu, G. Wang, F. Lochovsky, J. tao Sun, and Z. Chen. Understanding user’s

query intent with wikipedia. In WWW ’09, pages 471–480, New York, NY,
USA, 2009. ACM.

[5] A. Kulkarni, J. Teevan, K. M. Svore, and S. T. Dumais. Understanding temporal

query dynamics. In ACM WSDM ’11, pages 167–176, New York, NY, USA,
2011. ACM.

[6] M. Osborne, S. Petrovic, R. McCreadie, C. Macdonald, and I. Ounis. Bieber no

more: First story detection using twitter and wikipedia. In SIGIR ’12,
Time-aware Information Access Workshop ’12, 2012.

[7] S. Whiting, K. Zhou, J. M. Jose, O. Alonso, and T. Leelanupab. Crowdtiles:
presenting crowd-based information for event-driven information needs. In
CIKM ’12, pages 2698–2700, 2012.

[8] C. Zhai, W. W. Cohen, and J. D. Lafferty. Beyond independent relevance:
methods and evaluation metrics for subtopic retrieval. In SIGIR ’03, pages
10–17, 2003.

[9] K. Zhou, S. Whiting, J. M. Jose, and M. Lalmas. The impact of temporal intent

variability on diversity evaluation. In ECIR ’13, pages 820–823, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2013. Springer-Verlag.

992